Journal Artificial Intelligence Research 29 (2007) 391-419

Submitted 1/2007; published 8/2007

Obtaining Reliable Feedback Sanctioning Reputation
Mechanisms
Radu Jurca
Boi Faltings

radu.jurca@epfl.ch
boi.faltings@epfl.ch

Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL)
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (LIA)
CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
http: // liawww. epfl. ch

Abstract
Reputation mechanisms offer effective alternative verification authorities building trust electronic markets moral hazard. Future clients guide business decisions considering feedback past transactions; truthfully exposed, cheating
behavior sanctioned thus becomes irrational.
therefore becomes important ensure rational clients right incentives
report honestly. alternative side-payment schemes explicitly reward truthful reports, show honesty emerge rational behavior clients
repeated presence market. end describe mechanism supports
equilibrium truthful feedback obtained. characterize set paretooptimal equilibria mechanism, derive upper bound percentage false
reports recorded mechanism. important role existence
bound played fact rational clients establish reputation reporting
honestly.

1. Introduction
availability ubiquitous communication Internet driving migration business transactions direct contact people electronically mediated
interactions. People interact electronically either human-computer interfaces
programs representing humans, so-called agents. either case, physical interactions among entities occur, systems much susceptible fraud
deception.
Traditional methods avoid cheating involve cryptographic schemes trusted third
parties (TTPs) overlook every transaction. systems costly, introduce
potential bottlenecks, may difficult deploy due complexity heterogeneity environment: e.g., agents different geographical locations may subject
different legislation, different interaction protocols.
Reputation mechanisms offer novel effective way ensuring necessary level
trust essential functioning market. based observation agent strategies change consider interactions repeated:
party remembers past cheating, changes terms business accordingly future.
Therefore, expected gains due future transactions agent higher
reputation offset loss incurred cheating present. effect amc
2007
AI Access Foundation. rights reserved.

fiJurca & Faltings

plified considerably reputation information shared among large population,
thus multiplies expected future gains made accessible honest behavior.
Existing reputation mechanisms enjoy huge success. Systems eBay1 Amazon2
implement reputation mechanisms partly credited businesses success.
Studies show human users seriously take account reputation seller
placing bids online auctions (Houser & Wooders, 2006), despite incentive
free ride, feedback provided half transactions eBay (Resnick &
Zeckhauser, 2002).
One important challenge associated designing reputation mechanisms ensure
truthful feedback obtained actual interactions, property called incentivecompatibility. Rational users regard private information observed
valuable asset, freely shared. Worse even, agents external incentives
misreport thus manipulate reputation information available agents
(Harmon, 2004). Without proper measures, reputation mechanism obtain unreliable
information, biased strategic interests reporters.
Honest reporting incentives addressed differently depending predominant role reputation mechanisms. signaling role useful environments
service offered different providers may different quality, clients interacting provider treated equally (markets adverse selection).
case, example, market web-services. Different providers possess different
hardware resources employ different algorithms; makes certain web-services better
others. Nevertheless, requests issued web-service treated
program. clients might experience worse service others, differences random, determined provider. feedback previous clients
statistically estimates quality delivered provider future, hence signals
future clients provider selected.
sanctioning role, hand, present settings service requests
issued clients must individually addressed provider. Think barber,
must skillfully shave every client walks shop. problem providers
must exert care (and costly effort) satisfying every service request. Good quality
result enough effort exerted, provider better exerting less
effort: e.g., clients anyway pay shave, barber better sloppy
job fast possible order time customers. moral hazard situation
eliminated reputation mechanism punishes providers exerting effort.
Low effort results negative feedback decreases reputation, hence future
business opportunities provider. future loss due bad reputation offsets
momentary gain obtained cheating, makes cooperative behavior profitable.
well known solutions providing honest reporting incentives signaling
reputation mechanisms. Since clients interacting service receive quality
(in statistical sense), clients private observation influences belief regarding
experience clients. web-services market mentioned before, fact one
client bad experience certain web-service makes likely believe
clients encounter problems web-service. correlation
1. www.ebay.com
2. www.amazon.com

392

fiObtaining Reliable Feedback Sanctioning Reputation Mechanisms

clients private belief feedback reported clients used
design feedback payments make honesty Nash equilibrium. submitting
feedback, clients get paid amount depends value reported
reports submitted clients. long others report truthfully,
expected payment every client maximized honest report thus equilibrium.
Miller, Resnick, Zeckhauser (2005) Jurca Faltings (2006) show incentivecompatible payments designed offset reporting costs lying incentives.
sanctioning reputation mechanisms payment schemes guaranteed
incentive-compatible. Different clients may experience different service quality
provider decided exert different effort levels. private beliefs reporter
may longer correlated feedback clients, therefore, statistical
properties exploited Miller et al. (2005) longer present.
alternative, propose different incentives motivate honest reporting based
repeated presence client market. Game theoretic results (i.e., folk
theorems) show repeated interactions support new equilibria present deviations
made unattractive future penalties. Even without reputation mechanism, client
guide future play depending experience previous interactions. first
result paper, describe mechanism indeed supports cooperative equilibrium
providers exert effort time. reputation mechanism correctly records
client received low quality.
certainly applications clients repeatedly interact
seller potential moral hazard problem. barber shop mentioned one
example, people prefer going barber (or hairdresser). Another example
market delivery services. Every package must scheduled timely delivery,
involves cost provider. cost may saved occasionally
dropping package, hence moral hazard. Moreover, business clients typically rely
carrier dispatch documents merchandise. business
depends quality timeliness delivery, incentive form
lasting relationship get good service. Yet another example business person
repeatedly travels offshore client. business person direct interest
repeatedly obtain good service hotel closest clients offices.
assume quality observed clients influenced environmental
factors outside control of, however observable by, provider. Despite barbers
best effort, sudden movement client always generate accidental cut
make client unhappy. Likewise, delivery company may occasionally lose damage
packages due transportation accidents. Nevertheless, delivery company (like
barber) eventually learns certainty delays, damages losses entitle
clients complain unsatisfactory service.
mechanism propose quite simple. asking feedback client,
mechanism gives provider opportunity acknowledge failure, reimburse
client. provider claims good service reputation mechanism record
feedback client. Contradictory reports (the provider claims good service,
client submits negative feedback) may appear one parties lying,
therefore, client provider sanctioned: provider suffers loss
consequence negative report, client given small fine.
393

fiJurca & Faltings

One equilibrium mechanism providers always best deliver
promised quality, truthfully acknowledge failures caused environmental
factors. honest behavior motivated threat mistake drive
unsatisfied client away market. future transactions generate sufficient
revenue, provider afford risk losing client, hence equilibrium.
Unfortunately, socially desired equilibrium unique. Clients occasionally
accept bad service keep returning provider dont better
alternatives. Moreover, since complaining bad service sanctioned reputation
mechanism, clients might reluctant report negative feedback. Penalties negative
reports clients lack choice drives provider occasionally cheat order
increase revenue.
second result, characterize set pareto-optimal equilibria mechanism
prove amount unreported cheating occur limited two factors.
first factor limits amount cheating general, given quality
alternatives available clients. Better alternatives increase expectations
clients, therefore provider must cheat less order keep customers.
second factor limits amount unreported cheating, represents cost
incurred clients establish reputation reporting truth. stubbornly exposing
bad service happens, despite fine imposed reputation mechanism,
client signals provider committed always report truth. signals
eventually change strategy provider full cooperation, avoid
punishment negative feedback. reputation reporting truthfully course,
valuable client; therefore, rational client accepts lie (and give reputation)
cost building reputation reporting honestly greater
occasional loss created tolerated cheating. cost given ease
provider switches cooperative play, magnitude fine imposed
negative feedback.
Concretely, paper proceeds follows. Section 2 describe related work, followed detailed description setting Section 3. Section 4 presents game
theoretic model mechanism analysis reporting incentives equilibria.
establish existence cooperative equilibrium, derive un upper bound
amount cheating occur pareto-optimal equilibrium.
Section 5 establish cost building reputation reporting honestly,
hence compute upper bound percentage false reports recorded reputation
mechanism equilibrium.
continue Section 6 analyzing impact malicious buyers explicitly
try destroy reputation provider. give initial approximations
worst case damage buyers cause providers. discussions, open issues
directions future work discussed Section 7. Finally, Section 8 concludes work.

2. Related Work
notion reputation often used Game Theory signal commitment player
towards fixed strategy. mean saying clients establish reputation
reporting truth: commit always report truth. Building reputation
394

fiObtaining Reliable Feedback Sanctioning Reputation Mechanisms

usually requires incomplete information repeated game, significantly impact
set equilibrium points game. commonly referred reputation
effect, first characterized seminal papers Kreps, Milgrom, Roberts, Wilson
(1982), Kreps Wilson (1982) Milgrom Roberts (1982).
reputation effect extended games player (A) could benefit
committing certain strategy credible complete information
game: e.g., monopolist seller would commit fight potential entrants
chain-store game (Selten, 1978), however, commitment credible due cost
fighting. incomplete information game commitment type positive
probability, opponent (B) point become convinced playing
commitment type. point, B play best response ,
gives desired payoff. Establishing reputation commitment strategy requires
time cost. higher future payoffs offset cost building reputation,
reputation effect prescribes minimum payoffs equilibrium strategy give player
(otherwise, profitably deviate playing commitment type).
Fudenberg Levine (1989) study class repeated games long-run
player faces sequence single-shot opponents observe previous games.
long-run player sufficiently patient single-shot players positive prior belief
long-run player might commitment type, authors derive lower bound
payoff received long-run player Nash equilibrium repeated game.
result holds finitely infinitely repeated games, robust
perturbations information structure (i.e., independent types
positive probability).
Schmidt (1993) provides generalization result two long-run player
case special class games called conflicting interests, one players
sufficiently patient opponent. game conflicting interests
commitment strategy one player (A) holds opponent (B) minimax payoff.
author derives upper limit number rounds B play best response
commitment type, turn generates lower bound equilibrium payoff.
detailed treatment reputation effect, reader directed work Mailath
Samuelson (2006).
computer science information systems research, reputation information defines
aggregate feedback reports past transactions. semantics
using referring reputation provider. Reputation information encompasses
unitary appreciation personal attributes provider, influences trusting
decisions clients. Depending environment, reputation two main roles: signal
capabilities provider, sanction cheating behavior (Kuwabara, 2003).
Signaling reputation mechanisms allow clients learn providers
capable providing good service. systems widely used computational
trust mechanisms. Birk (2001) Biswas, Sen, Debnath (2000) describe systems
agents use direct past experience recognize trustworthy partners. global
efficiency market clearly increased, however, time needed build reputation
information prohibits use kind mechanisms large scale online market.
number signaling reputation mechanisms take consideration indirect reputation information, i.e., information reported peers. Schillo, Funk, Rovatsos (2000)
395

fiJurca & Faltings

Yu Singh (2002, 2003) use social networks order obtain reputation
unknown agent. Agents ask acquaintances several hops away trustworthiness
unknown agent. Recommendations afterwards aggregated single measure
agents reputation. class mechanisms, however intuitive, provide
rational participation incentives agents. Moreover, little protection
untruthful reporting, guarantee mechanism cannot manipulated
malicious provider order obtain higher payoffs.
Truthful reporting incentives signaling reputation mechanisms described
Miller et al. (2005). Honest reports explicitly rewarded payments take
account value submitted report, value report submitted another
client (called reference reporter ). payment schemes designed based proper
scoring rules, mathematical functions make possible revelation private beliefs
(Cooke, 1991). essence behind honest reporting incentives observation
private information client obtains interacting provider changes belief regarding reports clients. change beliefs exploited make honesty
ex-ante Nash equilibrium strategy.
Jurca Faltings (2006) extend result taking computational approach
designing incentive compatible payment schemes. Instead using closed form scoring
rules, compute payments using optimization problem minimizes total
budget required reward reporters. using several reference reports filtering
mechanisms, render payment mechanisms cheaper practical.
Dellarocas (2005) presents comprehensive investigation binary sanctioning reputation mechanisms. setting, providers equally capable providing high quality,
however, requires costly effort. role reputation mechanism encourage cooperative behavior punishing cheating: negative feedback reduces future revenues
either excluding provider market, decreasing price provider
charge future transactions. Dellarocas shows simple information structures
decision rules lead efficient equilibria, given clients report honestly.
paper builds upon mechanisms addressing reporting incentives. abstract away details underlying reputation mechanism explicit penalty
associated negative feedback. Given high enough penalties exist, reputation mechanism (i.e., feedback aggregation trusting decision rules) plugged
scheme.
group work addresses reporting incentives, mention work
Braynov Sandholm (2002), Dellarocas (2002) Papaioannou Stamoulis (2005).
Braynov Sandholm consider exchanges goods money prove market
agents trusted degree deserve trusted equally efficient
market complete trustworthiness. scaling amount traded product,
authors prove possible make rational sellers truthfully declare
trustworthiness. Truthful declaration ones trustworthiness eliminates need
reputation mechanisms significantly reduces cost trust management. However,
assumptions made trading environment (i.e. form cost function
selling price supposed smaller marginal cost) common
electronic markets.
396

fiObtaining Reliable Feedback Sanctioning Reputation Mechanisms

e-Bay-like auctions, Goodwill Hunting mechanism (Dellarocas, 2002) provides
way make sellers indifferent lying truthfully declaring quality good
offered sale. Momentary gains losses obtained misrepresenting goods quality
later compensated mechanism power modify announcement
seller.
Papaioannou Stamoulis (2005) describe incentive-compatible reputation mechanism particularly suited peer-to-peer applications. mechanism similar
ours, sense provider client punished submitting conflicting reports. authors experimentally show class common lying strategies
successfully deterred scheme. Unlike results, paper considers possible
equilibrium strategies sets bounds amount untruthful information recorded
reputation mechanism.

3. Setting
assume online market, rational clients (she) repeatedly request service one provider (he). Every client repeatedly interacts service provider,
however, successive requests client always interleaved enough requests generated clients. Transactions assumed sequential, provider
capacity constraints, accepts requests.
price service p monetary units, service either high (q1 )
low (q0 ) quality. high quality valuable clients, utility u(q1 ) = u.
Low quality utility 0, precisely distinguished high quality.
round, client decide request service provider, quit market
resort outside provider completely trustworthy. outside provider always
delivers high quality service, higher price p(1 + ).
client decides interact online provider, issues request
provider, pays service. provider decide exert low (e0 ) high
(e1 ) effort treating request. Low effort normalized cost 0, generates
low quality. High effort expensive (normalized cost equals c(e1 ) = c) generates
high quality probability < 1. fixed, depends environmental factors
outside control provider. p > c, individually rational providers
exert effort.
exerting effort, provider observe quality resulting service.
decide deliver service is, acknowledge failure roll back
transaction fully reimbursing3 client. assume perfect delivery channels,
client perceives exactly quality provider. delivery, client
inspects quality service, accuse low quality submitting negative report
reputation mechanism.
reputation mechanism (RM) unique market, trusted participants.
oversee monetary transactions (i.e., payments made clients provider)
impose fines parties. However, RM observe effort level
exerted provider, know quality delivered service.
3. reality, provider might pay penalty rolling back transaction. long penalty
small, qualitative results present paper remain valid.

397

fiJurca & Faltings

RM asks feedback client chose transact provider
current round (i.e., paid price service provider) provider delivered
service (i.e., provider reimburse client). client submits negative
feedback, RM punishes client provider: client must pay fine ,
provider accumulates negative reputation report.
3.1 Examples
Although simplistic, model retains main characteristics several interesting applications. delivery service perishable goods (goods lose value past certain
deadline) one them. Pizza, example, must delivered within 30 minutes, otherwise gets cold loses taste. Hungry clients order home, drive
expensive local restaurant, theyre sure get hot pizza. price home
delivered pizza p = 1, restaurant, pizza would cost p(1 + ) = 1.2.
cases, utility warm meal u = 2.
pizza delivery provider must exert costly effort deliver orders within deadline.
courier must dispatched immediately (high effort), estimated cost c = 0.8.
action usually results good service (the probability timely delivery
= 99%), traffic conditions unexpected accidents (e.g., address easily found)
may still delay deliveries past deadline.
destination, delivery person, well client, know delivery
late not. common practice, provider acknowledge late,
reimburse client. Clients may provide feedback reputation mechanism,
feedback counts reimbursed. clients fine submitting negative
report set example = 0.01. future loss provider caused
negative report (and quantified ) depends reputation mechanism.
simplified market car garagists plumbers could fit model. provider
commissioned repair car (respectively plumbing) quality work
depends exerted effort. High effort costly ensures lasting result
high probability. Low effort cheap, resulting fix temporary.
cases, however, warranty convention may specify right client ask
reimbursement problems reoccur within warranty period. Reputation feedback may
submitted end warranty period, accepted reimbursements
didnt occur.
interesting emerging application comes new generation web services
optimally decide treat every request. service types, high quality
response requires exclusive use costly resources. example, computation jobs
require CPU time, storage requests need disk space, information requests need queries
databases. Sufficient resources, prerequisite, guarantee good service.
Software hardware failures may occur, however, failures properly signaled
provider. monetary incentives become sufficiently important markets,
intelligent providers identify moral hazard problem, may act strategically
identified model.
398

fiObtaining Reliable Feedback Sanctioning Reputation Mechanisms

4. Behavior Reporting Incentives
game theoretic point view, one interaction client provider
modeled extensive-form game (G) imperfect public information, shown
Figure 1. client moves first decides (at node 1) whether play interact
provider, play resort trusted outside option.
client plays in, provider chose node 2 whether exert high
low effort (i.e., plays e1 e0 respectively). provider plays e0 generated
quality low. provider plays e1 , nature chooses high quality (q1 )
probability , low quality (q0 ) probability 1 . constant assumed
common knowledge market. seen resulting quality, provider delivers
(i.e., plays d) service, acknowledges low quality rolls back transaction (i.e.,
plays l) fully reimbursing client. service delivered, client report
positive (1) negative (0) feedback.
pure strategy deterministic mapping describing action players
information sets. client three information sets game G. first information
set singleton contains node 1 beginning game client must
decide playing out. second information set contains nodes 7 8
(the dotted oval Figure 1) client must decide reporting 0 1, given
received low quality, q0 . third information set singleton contains
node 9 client must decide reporting 0 1, given received high
quality, q1 . strategy in0q0 1q1 , example, honest reporting strategy, specifying
client enters game, reports 0 receives low quality, reports 1
receives high quality. set pure strategies client is:
AC = {out1q0 1q1 , out1q0 0q1 , out0q0 1q1 , out0q0 0q1 , in1q0 1q1 , in1q0 0q1 , in0q0 1q1 , in1q0 1q1 };
Similarly, set pure strategies provider is:
AP = {e0 l, e0 d, e1 lq0 lq1 , e1 lq0 dq1 , e1 dq0 lq1 , e1 dq0 dq1 };
e1 lq0 dq1 , example, socially desired strategy: provider exerts effort
node 2, acknowledges low quality node 5, delivers high quality node 6. pure
strategy profile pair (sC , sP ) sC AC sP AP . (A) denotes set
probability distributions elements A, C (AC ) P (AP ) mixed
strategies client, respectively provider, = (C , P ) mixed strategy
profile.
payoffs players
depend chosen strategy profile, move

nature. Let g() = gC (), gP () denote pair expected payoffs received
client, respectively provider playing strategy profile . function g :
(AC ) (AP ) R2 characterized Table 1 describs normal form
transformation G. Besides corresponding payments made client
provider, Table 1 reflects influence reputation mechanism,
explained Section 4.1. four strategies client involve playing node 1
generate outcomes, therefore, collapsed simplicity single
row Table 1.
399

fiJurca & Faltings

Client
1





Provider
2

e0

u-p(1+r)
0

e1
Nature
3

q0

4

Provider

Provider



l



q1

5

6

Provider



l

l

Client
7

0
0

0

-p-e
p-e

Client
1

8

9

0

-p
p

0
-c

1

-p-e
p-c-e

-p
p-c

0

u-p-e
p-c-e

0
-c

1

u-p
p-c

Figure 1: game representing one interaction. Empty circles represent decision nodes,
edge labels represent actions, full circles represent terminal nodes dotted
oval represents information set. Payoffs represented rectangles, top
row describes payoff client, second row describes payoff
provider.

4.1 Reputation Mechanism
every interaction, reputation mechanism records one three different signals
may receive: positive feedback client reports 1, negative feedback client
reports 0, neutral feedback provider rolls back transaction reimburses
client. Figure 1 (and Table 1) positive neutral feedback influence
payoff provider, negative feedback imposes punishment equivalent .
Two considerations made us choose representation. First, associate neutral
positive feedback reward (0 case) intuitively, acknowledgement failure may regarded honest behavior behalf provider.
Failures occur despite best effort, acknowledging them, provider shouldnt suffer.
However, neutral feedback may result provider exert effort.
lack punishment instances contradicts goal reputation mechanism
400

fiObtaining Reliable Feedback Sanctioning Reputation Mechanisms

in1q0 1q1

Provider

e0 l
e0
e1 lq0 lq1
e1 lq0 dq1
e1 dq0 lq1
e1 dq0 dq1

Client
in0q0 1q1

in1q0 0q1
0

0

0
0

0

p
p

p
p

0
p
p

0
c


0

p
p

0
c

in0q0 0q1
0

0
c

u p(1 + )
0
u p(1 + )
0

0
c

u p(1 + )
0

(u p)

(u p )

(u p)

(u p )

p c
(1 )p

(p ) c
(1 )p

p c
(1 )(p + )

(p ) c
(1 )(p + )

0

(1 )p c
u p

(1 )p c
(u ) p

(1)(p )c
u(1)p

(1)(p )c
u p

0

pc

p c

p (1 ) c

p c

0

u p(1 + )
u p(1 + )
u p(1 + )

Table 1: Normal transformation extensive form game, G
encourage exertion effort. Fortunately, action e0 l result rational behavior
two circumstances, excusable: one, provider defends
malicious client expected falsely report negative feedback (details Section
6), two, environmental noise big ( small) justify exertion
effort. Neutral feedback used estimate parameter , detect coalitions
malicious clients, indirectly, may influence revenue provider. However,
simplified model presented above, positive neutral feedback considered
terms generated payoffs.
second argument relates role RM constrain revenue
provider depending feedback client. several ways that.
Dellarocas (2005) describes two principles, two mechanisms punish provider
clients submit negative reports. first, works exclusion. negative
report reputation mechanism bans provider market probability .
probability tuned provider incentive cooperate almost
time, market stays efficient. second works changing conditions
future trade. Every negative report triggers decrease price next N clients
pay service. lower values N price decrease higher, nonetheless, N
take value efficient market.
mechanisms work future losses offset momentary gain provider
would intentionally cheating client. Note penalties given
endogenously lost future opportunities, require minimum premiums trusted
providers. margins high enough, providers care enough future
transactions, use present opportunity cheating.
Another option use exogenous penalties cheating. example, provider
may required buy licence operating market4 . licence partially
destroyed every negative feedback. Totaly destroyed licences must restored
new payment, remaining parts sold provider quits market.
price licence amount destroyed negative feedback scaled
4. reputation mechanism buy sell market licences

401

fiJurca & Faltings

rational providers incentive cooperate. Unlike previous solutions,
mechanism require minimum transaction margins punishments negative
feedback directly subtracted upfront deposit.
One way another, reputation mechanisms foster cooperation provider
associates value client feedback. Let V (R+ ) V (R ) value positive, respectively negative report. game Figure 1, V (R+ ) normalized 0, V (R )
. using notation, abstract away details reputation mechanism,
retain essential punishment associated negative feedback. reputation mechanism plugged scheme, long particular constraints (e.g.,
minimum margins transactions) satisfied.
One last aspect considered influence reputation mechanism
future transactions client. negative reports attract lower prices, rational long-run
clients might tempted falsely report order purchase cheaper services future.
Fortunately, mechanisms designed single-run clients, influence
reporting strategy long-run clients. reputation mechanism keeps last
N reports (Dellarocas, 2005) one them. false negative report influences
next N transactions provider; given N requests interleaved
two successive requests client, dishonest reporter cannot decrease
price future transactions.
licence-based mechanism described another example. price
service remains unchanged, therefore reporting incentives unaffected.
hand, negative feedback punished exclusion, clients may reluctant
report negatively, since lose trading partner.
4.2 Analysis Equilibria
one-time game presented Figure 1 one subgame equilibrium client
opts out. asked report feedback, client always prefers report 1 (reporting
0 attracts penalty ). Knowing this, best strategy provider exert low
effort deliver service. Knowing provider play e0 d, strictly better
client play out.
repeated game client provider may, however,
equilibria. analyzing repeated game, let us note every interaction
provider particular client strategically isolated considered independently.
provider accepts clients views identically, maximize expected
revenue isolated repeated games.
on, consider repeated interaction provider
one client. modeled -fold repetition stage game G, denoted GT ,
finite infinite. paper deal infinite horizon case, however,
results obtained applied minor modifications finitely repeated games
large enough.
per period discount factor reflecting probability market ceases
exist round, (or present value future revenues), let us denote
expected discount factor game GT . client interacts provider
average every N rounds, = N .
402

fiObtaining Reliable Feedback Sanctioning Reputation Mechanisms

life-time expected payoff players computed as:

X

gi ;

=0

{C, P } client, respectively provider, gi expected payoff obtained
player th interaction, discount applied compute present day
value gi .
consider normalized life-time expected payoffs, payoffs G GT
expressed using measure:

X

Vi = (1 )

gi ;

(1)

=0

define average continuation payoff player period onward (and including period t) as:
Vit = (1 )


X

gi ;

(2)

=t

set outcomes publicly perceived players round is:
= {out, l, q0 1, q0 0, q1 1, q1 0}

where:
observed client opts out,
l observed provider acknowledges low quality rolls back transaction,
qi j observed provider delivers quality qi {q0 , q1 } client reports
j {0, 1}.
denote ht specific public history repeated game set H = (Y )t
possible histories including period t. repeated game, public strategy
player sequence maps (it ), : H t1 (Ai ) prescribes (mixed)
strategy played round t, public history ht1 H t1 . perfect public
equilibrium (PPE) profile public strategies = (C , P ) that, beginning time
given public history ht1 , form Nash equilibrium point (Fudenberg,
Levine, & Maskin, 1994). Vit () continuation payoff player given strategy
profile .
G game product structure since public outcome expressed vector
two components (yC , yP ) distribution yi depends actions
player {C, P }, client, respectively provider. games, Fudenberg et al.
(1994) establish Folk Theorem proving feasible, individually rational payoff
profile achievable PPE G discount factor close enough 1. set
feasible, individually rational payoff profiles characterized by:
minimax payoff client, obtained option out: VC = u p(1 + );
403

fiJurca & Faltings

VC
(in1q01q1 ; e 1lq0d q1 )

(u -p)

(in1q01q1; e 1dq0d q1 )

u-p
pareto optimal
frontier

u -p(1+)

0

p-c


p-c


VP
p

VP

-p
(in1q01q1; e 0d)

Figure 2: pareto-optimal frontier set feasible, individually rational payoff
profiles G.

minimax payoff provider, obtained provider plays e0 l: VP = 0;
pareto optimal frontier (graphically presented Figure 2) delimited
payoffs given (linear combination of) strategy profiles (in1q0 1q1 , e1 lq0 dq1 ),
(in1q0 1q1 , e1 dq0 dq1 ) (in1q0 1q1 , e0 d).
contains one point (i.e., payoff client plays out) (up) >
u p(1 + ) p c > 0. conditions impose restrictions minimum margin
generated transaction interaction profitable. PPE payoff profile
gives provider maximum payoff (VC , VP ) where:
(
VP =

u c u + p(1 + )
p + c(pu)
>
u

u(1)
p
u(1)
p

VC defined above.
completely characterizing set PPE payoffs discount factors strictly
smaller 1 outside scope paper, let us note following results:
First, discount factor high enough (but strictly less 1) respect
profit margin obtained provider one interaction, least one PPE
reputation mechanism records honest reports. Moreover, equilibrium
pareto-optimal.
Proposition 1 >

p
p(1+)c ,

strategy profile:

provider always exerts high effort, delivers high quality; client
deviates equilibrium , provider switches e0 rest rounds;
404

fiObtaining Reliable Feedback Sanctioning Reputation Mechanisms

client always reports 1 asked submit feedback; provider deviates,
(i.e., receives low quality), client switches rest rounds.
pareto-optimal PPE.
Proof. profitable client deviate equilibrium path. Reporting
0 attracts penalty present round, termination interaction
provider (the provider stops exerting effort round onwards).
provider, hand, momentarily gain deviating e1 dq0 dq1 e0 d.
deviation e1 dq0 dq1 gives expected momentary gain p(1 ) expected
continuation loss (1 )(p c). deviation e0 brings expected momentary
gain equal (1 )p + c expected continuation loss p c. discount
factor satisfying hypothesis, deviations profitable. discount factor
low enough respect profit margins, future revenues given
equilibrium strategy offset momentary gains obtained deviating.
equilibrium payoff profile (VC , VP ) = ((u p), p c), pareto-optimal
socially efficient.

Second, prove client never reports negative feedback paretooptimal PPE, regardless value discount factor. restriction pareto-optimal
justifiable practical reasons: assuming client provider somehow
negotiate equilibrium going play, makes sense choose one
pareto-optimal equilibria.
Proposition 2 probability client reports negative feedback equilibrium
path pareto-optimal PPE strategy zero.
Sketch Proof. full proof presented Appendix follows following steps.
Step 1, equilibrium payoffs expressed adding present round payoff
discounted continuation payoff next round onward. Step 2, take PPE payoff
profile V = (VC , VP ), PPE payoff profile V 0 = (VC0 , VP )
VC < VC0 . client never reports negative feedback first round equilibrium
gives V . Step 3, equilibrium continuation payoff first round satisfies
conditions set V . Hence, probability client reports negative feedback
equilibrium path gives V 0. Pareto-optimal PPE payoff profiles clearly satisfy
definition V , hence result proposition.

third result want mention here, upper bound
percentage false reports recorded reputation mechanism paretooptimal equilibria.
Proposition 3 upper bound percentage false reports recorded reputation mechanism PPE equilibrium is:
(


(1)(pu)+p
p

p
u

405

p u(1 );
p > u(1 )

(3)

fiJurca & Faltings

Sketch Proof. full proof presented Appendix B builds directly result
Proposition 2. Since clients never report negative feedback along pareto-optimal equilibria,
false reports recorded reputation mechanism appear provider
delivers low quality, client reports positive feedback. However, PPE profile
must give client least VC = u p(1 + ), otherwise client better resorting
outside option. Every round provider deliberatively delivers low quality
gives client payoff strictly smaller u p(1 + ). equilibrium payoff greater
VC therefore possible percentage rounds provider delivers
low quality bounded. bound limits percentage false reports recorded
reputation mechanism.

intuitive understanding results presented section, let us refer
pizza delivery example detailed Section 3.1. price home delivered pizza
p = 1, local restaurant pizza would cost p(1 + ) = 1.2. utility
warm pizza client u = 2, cost delivery c = 0.8 probability
unexpected traffic conditions delay delivery beyond 30 minutes deadline (despite
best effort provider) 1 = 0.01.
client secure minimax payoff VC = u p(1 + ) = 0.8 always going
restaurant. However, socially desired equilibrium happens client
orders pizza home, pizza service exerts effort deliver pizza time:
case payoff client VC = (u p) = 0.99, payoff provider
VP = p c = 0.19.
Proposition 1 gives lower bound discount factor pizza delivery service
repeated clients expect socially desired equilibrium. bound =
p
p(1+)c = 0.84; assuming daily discount factor pizza service = 0.996,
client must order pizza home least every 6 weeks. values
discount factors interpreted terms minimum number rounds
client (and provider) likely play game. example, discount factor
viewed probability client (respectively provider) live another
interaction market. follows average lifetime provider least
1/(1 ) = 250 interactions (with clients), average lifetime client
least 1/(1 ) = 7 interactions (with pizza delivery service). clearly
realistic numbers.
Proposition 3 gives upper bound percentage false reports mechanism may record equilibrium clients. u(1 ) = 0.02 < 0.2 = p, limit
is:
=

p
= 0.1;
u

follows least 90% reports recorded mechanism (in equilibrium)
correct. false reports (false positive reports) result rare cases pizza
delivery intentionally delayed save cost clients complain. false
report justified, example, providers threat refuse future orders
clients complain. Given late deliveries still rare enough, clients better
home delivery restaurant, hence accept threat.
options become available clients (e.g., competing delivery services) bound
decrease.
406

fiObtaining Reliable Feedback Sanctioning Reputation Mechanisms

Please note upper bound defined Proposition 3 depends outside
alternative available provider, influenced punishment introduced
reputation mechanism. happens revenue client independent
interactions clients, therefore, reputation information reported
clients. Equilibrium strategies exclusively based direct experience
client. following section, however, refine bound considering
clients build reputation reporting honestly. There, punishment plays
important role.

5. Building Reputation Truthful Reporting
immediate consequence Propositions 2 3 provider extract
surplus created transactions occasionally delivering low quality, convincing
clients report negative feedback (providers promising sufficiently high
continuation payoffs prevent client resort outside provider). Assuming
provider power market, could influence choice
equilibrium strategy one gives revenue, holds clients close
minimax payoff VC = u p(1 + ) given outside option.5
However, client could commit report honestly, (i.e., commit play strategy
sC = in0q0 1q1 ) would benefit cooperative trade. providers best response
sC play e1 lq0 dq1 repeatedly, leads game socially efficient outcome.
Unfortunately commitment sC credible complete information game,
reasons explained Section 4.2.
Following results Kreps et al. (1982), Fudenberg Levine (1989) Schmidt
(1993) know honest reporting commitments may become credible game
incomplete information. Suppose provider incomplete information G ,
believes non-negative probability facing committed client always
reports truth. rational client fake committed client, build
reputation reporting honestly. reputation becomes credible, provider
play e1 lq0 dq1 (the best response sC ), better client
payoff would obtain provider knew rational type.
effect reputation building, set equilibrium points reduced set
payoff client higher payoff obtained client committed
report honestly. anticipated Proposition 3, smaller set equilibrium points
reduces bound false reports recorded reputation mechanism. certain cases,
bound reduced almost zero.
Formally, incomplete information modeled perturbation complete
information repeated game G period 0 (before first round game
played) type client drawn nature countable set according
probability measure . clients payoff additionally depends type.
5. pareto-optimal PPE payoff profiles renegotiation-proof (Bernheim & Ray, 1989; Farrell &
Maskin, 1989). follows proof Proposition 3: continuation payoffs enforcing paretooptimal PPE payoff profile pareto-optimal. Therefore, clients falsely report positive feedback
even restrictive notion negotiation-proof equilibrium.

407

fiJurca & Faltings

say perturbed game G () provider incomplete information
sure true type client.
Two types particular importance:
normal type client, denoted 0 , rational client
payoffs presented Figure 1.
commitment type client, denoted , always prefers play commitment strategy sC . rational perspective, commitment type client obtains
arbitrarily high supplementary reward reporting truth. external reward makes strategy sC dominant strategy, therefore, commitment
type client play anything else sC .
Theorem 1 give upper bound kP number times provider delivers
low quality G (), given always observes client reporting honestly.
intuition behind result following. providers best response
honest reporter e1 lq0 dq1 : always exert high effort, deliver quality
high. gives commitment type client maximum attainable payoff G (),
corresponding socially efficient outcome. provider, however, would better
playing normal type client, obtain expected payoff
greater p c.
normal type client may distinguished commitment type client
rounds provider delivers low quality: commitment type always reports
negative feedback, normal type might decide report positive feedback order
avoid penalty . provider therefore decide deliver low quality client
order test real type. question is, many times provider test
true type client.
Every failed test (i.e., provider delivers low quality client reports negative
feedback) generates loss provider, slightly enforces belief
client reports honestly. Since provider cannot wait infinitely future payoffs,
must time provider stop testing type provider, accepts
play socially efficient strategy, e1 lq0 dq1 .
switch socially efficient strategy triggered revelation clients
type. provider believes client behaves commitment type,
client commitment type. client may well normal type
chooses mimic commitment type, hope obtain better service
provider. However, trying determine true type client costly
provider. Therefore, provider chooses play e1 lq0 dq1 , best response
commitment strategy sC .
Theorem 1 provider incomplete information G , assigns positive probability normal commitment type client ((0 ) > 0, 0 = ( ) > 0),
finite upper bound, kP , number times provider delivers low quality
equilibrium G (). upper bound is:



kP =





ln(0 )


P p+c)+(1)p
ln (V
(VP p+c)+(1)

408

(4)

fiObtaining Reliable Feedback Sanctioning Reputation Mechanisms

Proof. First, use important result obtained Fudenberg Levine (1989)
statistical inference (Lemma 1): every previously delivered low quality service sanctioned negative report, provider must expect increasing probability
next low quality delivery sanctioned negative feedback. Technically,
< 1, provider deliver n() low quality services (sanctioned negative
feedback) expecting n() + 1 low quality delivery sanctioned
negative feedback probability greater . number equals to:



ln
n() =
;
ln

stated earlier, lemma prove provider become convinced
facing commitment type client. simply proves finite number
rounds provider becomes convinced client playing commitment
type.
VP
Second, > V +(1)
strictly smaller 1, rational provider
P
deliver low quality (it easy verify maximum discounted future gain
compensate risk getting negative feedback present round).
previously mentioned lemma, must equilibrium, provider delivers low
quality finite number times.
Third, let us analyze round, t, provider deliver low quality
service (play dq0 ) last time. belief provider client reports
honestly round t, expected payoff (just deciding deliver low quality
service) computed follows:
probability client reports 0. reputation reporting honestly becomes
credible, provider plays e1 lq0 dq1 subsequent rounds. provider gains
p current round, expects p c subsequent rounds;
probability 1, client reports 1 deviates commitment strategy,
provider knows facing rational client, choose continuation PPE
strategy complete information game. gains p current round,
expects VP subsequent rounds;
VP (1 )(p ) + ((p c) + (1 )VP )

hand, provider acknowledged low quality rolled back
transaction (i.e., play lq0 ), expected payoff would least:
VP0 (1 )0 + (p c)

Since provider chooses nonetheless play dq0 must VP VP0
equivalent to:
=

(VP p + c) + (1 )p
(VP p + c) + (1 )

409

(5)

fiJurca & Faltings

Finally, replacing Equation (5) definition n() obtain upper bound
number times provider delivers low quality service client committed
report honestly.

existence kP reduces possible equilibrium payoffs client get
G (). Consider rational client receives first time low quality.
following options:
report negative feedback attempt build reputation reporting honestly.
payoff current round p . Moreover, worst case expectation
future next kP 1 rounds give p , followed
commitment payoff equal (u p):
VC |0 = (1 )(p ) + (1 kP 1 )(p ) + kP (u p);

(6)

hand, reporting positive feedback reveals normal type,
loses p current round, expects continuation payoff equal VC given
PPE strategy profile complete information game G :
VC |1 = (1 )(p) + VC ;

(7)

reputation mechanism records false reports clients incentive build reputation reporting honestly, VC |1 > VC |0; true for:
VC > kP 1 (u p) (1 kP 1 )(p + )

1
;


Following argument Proposition 3 obtain bound percentage
false reports recorded reputation mechanism pareto-optimal PPE gives
client least VC :
(
=

(up)VC
p
upVC
u

VC u p;
VC < u p

(8)

particular importance case kP = 1. VC become:
VC = (u p)

1
;


=

(1 )
;
p

(9)

probability recording false report (after first one) arbitrarily close
0 0.
pizza delivery example introduced Section 3.1, Figure 3 plots bound, kP ,
defined Theorem 1, function prior belief (0 ) provider client
honest reporter. used value discount factor equal = 0.95,
average, every client interacts 1/(1 ) = 20 times provider.
penalty negative feedback taken = 2.5. provider believes 20%
410

fiObtaining Reliable Feedback Sanctioning Reputation Mechanisms

10

9

8

7

kP

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0

Figure 3: upper bound kP function prior belief 0 .
clients always report honestly, deliver 3 times low quality.
belief goes 0 = 40% rational provider deliver low quality once.
Figure 4 plot values bounds (Equation (3)) (Equation (8))
function prior belief 0 . bounds simultaneously hold, therefore maximum
percentage false reports recorded reputation mechanism minimum
two. 0 less 0.25, kP 2, , reputation effect significantly
reduce worst case percentage false reports recorded mechanism. However,
0 (0.25, 0.4) reputation mechanism records (in worst case) half many false
reports, 0 > 0.4, percentage false reports drops 0.005. probability
decreased decreasing penalty . limit, approaches 0,
reputation mechanism register false report vanishing probability.
result Theorem 1 interpreted worst case scenario. real markets,
providers already small predisposition cooperate defect fewer times.
Moreover, mechanism self enforcing, sense clients act commitment types, higher prior beliefs providers new, unknown clients
report truthfully, therefore easier new clients act truthful
reporters.
mentioned end Section 4.2, bound strongly depends punishment
imposed reputation mechanism negative feedback. higher , easier
clients build reputation, therefore, lower amount false information
recorded reputation mechanism.

6. Threat Malicious Clients
mechanism described far encourages service providers best deliver
good service. clients assumed rational, committed report honestly,
411

fiJurca & Faltings

0.4



min(, )

0.35

0.3

,

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0

Figure 4: maximum probability recording false report function prior
belief 0 .

either case, never report negative feedback unfairly. section, investigate
happens clients explicitly try hurt providers submitting fake negative
ratings reputation mechanism.
immediate consequence fake negative reports clients lose money. However,
costs negative report would probably small deter clients separate agendas hurting provider. Fortunately, mechanism propose naturally
protects service providers consistent attacks initiated malicious clients.
Formally, malicious type client, , obtains supplementary (external) payoff
reporting negative feedback. Obviously, greater penalty , otherwise
results Proposition 2 would apply. incomplete information game G (),
provider assigns non-zero initial probability belief client malicious.
normal type, 0 , honest reporter type malicious type
non-zero initial probability, mechanism describe robust unfair
negative reports. first false negative report exposes client malicious, since
neither normal, commitment type report 0 receiving high quality.
Bayes Law, providers updated belief following false negative report must assign
probability 1 malicious type. Although providers allowed refuse service
requests, protect malicious clients playing e0 l: i.e., exert
low effort reimburse client afterwards. RM records neutral feedback
case, sanction provider. e0 l, malicious clients better
quitting market (opt out), thus stopping attack. RM records one false
negative report every malicious client, assuming identity changes difficult,
providers vulnerable unfair punishments.
412

fiObtaining Reliable Feedback Sanctioning Reputation Mechanisms

types (besides 0 , ) non-zero initial probability, malicious
clients harder detect. could masquerade client types normal,
accidentally misreport. rational provider immediately exclude (by playing
e0 l) normal clients rarely misreport: majority cooperative transactions
rewarded positive feedback still generate positive payoffs. Let us consider
client type 0 () behaves exactly normal type, misreports 0 instead
1 independently probability . interacting client type 0 (),
provider receives maximum number unfair negative reports playing efficient
equilibrium: i.e., e1 lq0 dq1 . case, providers expected payoff is:
VP = p c ;

Since VP positive (the minimax payoff provider 0, given e0 l), must
pc
.
maximum value good approximation maximum percentage
false negative reports malicious type submit reputation mechanism.
significantly higher number harmful reports exposes malicious type allows
provider defend himself.
Note, however, malicious type submit fraction false reports
type 0 () positive prior probability. provider believe
normal client make many mistakes (even percentage false reports still
low enough generate positive revenues) attributes false reports malicious type,
disengages cooperative behavior. Therefore, one method reduce impact
malicious clients make sure normal clients make mistakes. Technical
means (for example providing automated tools formatting submitting feedback),
improved user interfaces (that make easier human users spot reporting mistakes)
greatly limit percentage mistakes made normal clients, therefore,
reduce amount harm done malicious clients.
One concrete method reducing mistakes solicit negative feedback
clients (the principle news good news, applied Dellarocas (2005)).
reporting involves conscious decision, mistakes less frequent.
hand, reporting effort add penalty negative report, makes harder
normal clients establish reputation honest reporters. Alternative methods
reducing harm done malicious clients (like filtering mechanisms, etc., ) well
tighter bounds percentage false reports introduced clients
addressed future work.

7. Discussion Future Work
benefits obtained clients reputation reporting honestly shared
within market. reports submitted client interacting providers
change initial beliefs new provider. seen Section 5, providers
cheat less priory expect higher probability encounter honest reporting
clients. client built reputation truthfully reporting providers
behavior benefit cooperative trade entire lifetime, without
convince provider separately. Therefore upper bound loss client
withstand order convince provider commitment type, becomes upper
413

fiJurca & Faltings

bound total loss client withstand entire lifetime market.
effectively share reputation clients within market remains open issue.
Correlated idea observation clients use mechanism
motivated keep identity. generalized markets agents encouraged
play roles (e.g. peer-2-peer file sharing market fact agent acts
provider interpreted strong indication double identity
intention cheating) mechanism solves problem signaled Friedman
Resnick (2001) related cheap online pseudonyms. price pay new identity
loss due building reputation truthful reporter acting client.
Unlike incentive-compatible mechanism pay reporters depending feedback
provided peers, mechanism described less vulnerable collusion.
reason individual clients would collude badmouth (i.e., artificially decrease reputation of) provider. However, long punishment negative feedback
super-linear number reports (this usually case), coordinating within coalition brings benefits colluders: individual actions effective actions
part coalition. collusion provider client accelerate synchronization strategies one PPE profiles (collusion non-PPE
strategy profile stable), rather desirable. profitable collusion
happen competitor providers incentivize normal clients unfairly downrate
current provider. Colluding clients become malicious case, limits
harm presented Section 6.
mechanism describe general solution online markets.
general retail e-commerce, clients dont usually interact service provider
once. showed along paper, assumption repeated interaction
crucial results. Nevertheless, believe several scenarios practical
importance meet requirements (e.g., interactions part supply chain).
these, mechanism used conjunction reputation mechanisms
guarantee reliable feedback improve overall efficiency market.
mechanism criticized centralized. reputation mechanism acts central authority supervising monetary transactions, collecting feedback
imposing penalties participants. However, see problem implementing
reputation mechanism distributed system. Different providers use different
reputation mechanisms, or, even switch mechanisms given safeguarding measures place. Concrete implementations remain addressed future work.
Although present setting service always costs amount,
results easily extended scenarios provider may deliver different kinds
services, different prices. long provider believes requests
randomly drawn distribution, bounds presented computed
using average values u, p c. constraint providers belief necessary
order exclude unlikely situations provider cheats one time high
value transaction, knowing following interactions carry little revenue, therefore,
cannot impose effective punishments.
paper, systematically overestimate bounds worst case percentage
false reports recorded mechanism. computation tight bounds requires
precise quantitative description actual set PPE payoffs client provider
414

fiObtaining Reliable Feedback Sanctioning Reputation Mechanisms

G . Fudenberg et al. (1994) Abreu, Pearce, Stacchetti (1990) pose
theoretical grounds computing set PPE payoffs infinitely repeated game
discount factors strictly smaller 1. However, efficient algorithms allow us
find set still open question. research domain progresses, expect
able significantly lower upper bounds described Sections 4 5.
One direction future research study behavior mechanism
two-sided incomplete information: i.e. client uncertain type
provider. provider type particular importance greedy type always
likes keep client continuation payoff arbitrarily close minimal one.
situation expect able find upper bound kC number rounds
rational client would willing test true type provider. condition kP < kC
describes constraints parameters system reputation effect
work favor client: i.e. provider give first psychological
war revert cooperative equilibrium.
problem involuntary reporting mistakes briefly mentioned Section 6 needs
addressing. Besides false negative mistakes (reporting 0 instead 1), normal clients
make false positive mistakes (report 1 instead intended 0). present
framework, one mistake enough ro ruin reputation normal type client
report honestly. one reasons chose sequential model
feedback client required provider acknowledges low quality.
reputation client becomes credible, provider always rolls back transactions
generate (accidentally not) low quality, client required continuously defend
reputation. Nevertheless, consequences reporting mistakes reputation
building phase must considered detail. Similarly, mistakes made provider,
monitoring communication errors influence results presented here.
Last, least, practical implementations mechanism propose must
address problem persistent online identities. One possible attack created easy
identity changes mentioned Section 6: malicious buyers continuously change
identity order discredit provider. another attack, provider use fake
identities increase revenue. punishments negative feedback generated
endogenously decreased prices fixed number future transactions (e.g., Dellarocas,
2005), provider adopt following strategy: cheats real customers,
generates sufficient number fake transactions two real transactions,
effect created real negative report disappears. easy fix latter
attack charge transaction entrance fees. However, measures affect
overall efficiency market, therefore, different applications likely need
individual solutions.

8. Conclusions
Effective reputation mechanisms must provide appropriate incentives order obtain
honest feedback self-interested clients. environments characterized adverse
selection, direct payments explicitly reward honest information conditioning
amount paid information reported peers. technique unfortunately work service providers moral hazard, individually
415

fiJurca & Faltings

decide requests satisfy. Sanctioning reputation mechanisms must therefore use
mechanisms obtain reliable feedback.
paper describe incentive-compatible reputation mechanism clients
repeated presence market. asking feedback clients,
allow provider acknowledge failures reimburse price paid service.
future transactions generate sufficient profit, prove equilibrium
provider behaves socially desired: always exerts effort, reimburses clients
occasionally receive bad service due uncontrollable factors. Moreover, analyze
set pareto-optimal equilibria mechanism, establish limit maximum
amount false information recorded mechanism. bound depends
external alternatives available clients ease commit
reporting truth.

Appendix A. Proof Proposition 2
probability client reports negative feedback equilibrium path
pareto-optimal PPE strategy zero.
Proof.
Step 1. Following principle dynamic programming (Abreu et al., 1990), payoff
profile V = (VC , VP ) PPE G , strategy profile G,
continuation PPE payoffs profiles {W (y)|y } G , that:
V obtained playing current round, PPE strategy gives W (y)
continuation payoff, public outcome current round,
P r[y|] probability observing playing :
VC = (1 )gC () +

X
yY

VP = (1 )gP () +

X


P r[y|] WC (y) ;

P r[y|] WP (y) ;

yY

player finds profitable deviate :
X

0



0
VC (1 )gC (C
, P ) +
P r y|(C
, P ) WC (y) ;

0
C
6= C

yY

X





VP (1 )gP (C , P0 ) +
P r y|(C , P0 ) WP (y) ;

P0 6= P

yY

strategy payoff profiles {W (y)|y } said enforce V .
Step 2. Take PPE payoff profile V = (VC , VP ), PPE
payoff profile V 0 = (VC0 , VP ) VC < VC0 . Let {W (y)|y } enforce V , assume
assigns positive probability 0 = P r[q0 0|] > 0 outcome q0 0. 1 = P r[q0 1|]
(possibly equal 0), let us consider:
0 , ) 0 obtained asking client
strategy profile 0 = (C
P
C
C
report 1 instead 0 receives low quality (i.e., q0 );

416

fiObtaining Reliable Feedback Sanctioning Reputation Mechanisms

continuation payoffs {W 0 (y)|y } Wi0 (q0 1) = 0 Wi (q0 0) + 1 Wi (q0 1)
Wi0 (y 6= q0 1) = Wi (y) {C, P }. Since, set correlated PPE payoff
profiles G convex, W (y) PPE payoff profiles, W 0 (y).
payoff profile (VC0 , VP ), VC0 = VC + (1 )0 PPE equilibrium profile
enforced 0 {W 0 (y)|y }. However, contradicts assumption
VC0 < VC , P r[q0 0|] must 0. Following exactly argument, prove
P r[q1 0|] = 0.
Step 3. Taking V , {W (y)|y } step 2, have:
VC = (1 )gC () +

X


P r[y|] WC (y) ;

(10)

yY

PPE payoff profile V 0 = (VC0 , VP ) VC0 > VC , must
continuation payoffs W (y) satisfy property. (Assume otherwise
PPE (WC0 (y), WP (y)) WC0 (y) > WC (y). Replacing WC0 (y) (10) obtain V 0
contradicts hypothesis).
continuing recursion, obtain client never reports 0 equilibrium
path enforces payoff profile defined Step 2. Pareto-optimal payoff profiles clearly
enter category, hence result proposition.


Appendix B. Proof Proposition 3
upper bound percentage false reports recorded reputation mechanism
PPE equilibrium is:
(


(1)(pu)+p
p
p
u

p u(1 );
p > u(1 )

Proof. Since clients never report negative feedback along pareto-optimal equilibria,
false reports recorded reputation mechanism appear provider
delivers low quality, client reports positive feedback. Let = (C , P ) paretooptimal PPE strategy profile. induces probability distribution public histories
and, therefore, expected outcomes following transactions. Let
probability distribution induced outcomes round t. (q0 0) = (q1 0) = 0
proven Proposition 2. payoff received client playing therefore:
VC () (1 )


X



(q0 1)(p) + (q1 1)(u p) + (l)0 + (out)(u p p) ;

t=0

(q0 1)+t (q1 1)+t (l)+t (out) = 1 (q0 1)+t (l) (1)t (q1 1)/,
probability q0 least (1 )/ times probability q1 .
discount factor, , probability repeated interaction stop
transaction, expected probability outcome q0 1 is:
= (1 )


X
t=0

417

(q0 1);

fiJurca & Faltings

Since PPE profile must give client least VC = up(1+), (otherwise client
better resorting outside option), VC () VC . replacing expression
VC (), taking account constraints probability q1 obtain:


(p) + (u p) min 1 , VC ;
(


(1)(pu)+p
p

p
u

p u(1 );
p > u(1 )


References
Abreu, P., Pearce, D., & Stacchetti, E. (1990). Toward Theory Discounted Repeated
Games Imperfect Monitoring. Econometrica, 58 (5), 1041 1063.
Bernheim, B. D., & Ray, D. (1989). Collective Dynamic Consistency Repeated Games.
Games Economic Behavior, 1, 295326.
Birk, A. (2001). Learning Trust. Falcone, R., Singh, M., & Tan, Y.-H. (Eds.), Trust
Cyber-societies, Vol. LNAI 2246, pp. 133144. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.
Biswas, A., Sen, S., & Debnath, S. (2000). Limiting Deception Group Social Agents.
Applied Artificial Intelligence, 14, 785797.
Braynov, S., & Sandholm, T. (2002). Incentive Compatible Mechanism Trust Revelation.
Proceedings AAMAS, Bologna, Italy.
Cooke, R. (1991). Experts Uncertainity: Opinion Subjective Probability Science.
Oxford University Press: New York.
Dellarocas, C. (2002). Goodwill Hunting: Economically Efficient Online Feedback.
Padget, J., & et al. (Eds.), Agent-Mediated Electronic Commerce IV. Designing Mechanisms Systems, Vol. LNCS 2531, pp. 238252. Springer Verlag.
Dellarocas, C. (2005). Reputation Mechanism Design Online Trading Environments
Pure Moral Hazard. Information Systems Research, 16 (2), 209230.
Farrell, J., & Maskin, E. (1989). Renegotiation Repeated Games. Games Economic
Behavior, 1, 327360.
Friedman, E., & Resnick, P. (2001). Social Cost Cheap Pseudonyms. Journal
Economics Management Strategy, 10(2), 173199.
Fudenberg, D., & Levine, D. (1989). Reputation Equilibrium Selection Games
Patient Player. Econometrica, 57, 759778.
Fudenberg, D., Levine, D., & Maskin, E. (1994). Folk Theorem Imperfect Public
Information. Econometica, 62 (5), 9971039.
Harmon, A. (2004). Amazon Glitch Unmasks War Reviewers. New York Times.
Houser, D., & Wooders, J. (2006). Reputation Auctions: Theory Evidence
eBay. Journal Economics Management Strategy, 15, 353369.
418

fiObtaining Reliable Feedback Sanctioning Reputation Mechanisms

Jurca, R., & Faltings, B. (2006). Minimum Payments Reward Honest Reputation
Feedback. Proceedings ACM Conference Electronic Commerce (EC06),
pp. 190199, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
Kreps, D. M., Milgrom, P., Roberts, J., & Wilson, R. (1982). Rational Cooperation
Finitely Repeated Pisoners Dilemma. Journal Economic Theory, 27, 245252.
Kreps, D. M., & Wilson, R. (1982). Reputation Imperfect Information. Journal
Economic Theory, 27, 253279.
Kuwabara, K. (2003). Decomposing Reputation Effects: Sanctioning Signaling?. Working
paper.
Mailath, G., & Samuelson, L. (2006). Repeated Games Reputations: Long-Run Relationships. Oxford University Press.
Milgrom, P., & Roberts, J. (1982). Predation, Reputation Entry Deterrence. Journal
Economic Theory, 27, 280312.
Miller, N., Resnick, P., & Zeckhauser, R. (2005). Eliciting Informative Feedback: PeerPrediction Method. Management Science, 51, 1359 1373.
Papaioannou, T. G., & Stamoulis, G. D. (2005). Incentives Mechanism Promoting
Truthful Feedback Peer-to-Peer Systems. Proceedings IEEE/ACM CCGRID
2005.
Resnick, P., & Zeckhauser, R. (2002). Trust Among Strangers Electronic Transactions:
Empirical Analysis eBays Reputation System. Baye, M. (Ed.), Economics
Internet E-Commerce, Vol. 11 Advances Applied Microeconomics.
Elsevier Science, Amsterdam.
Schillo, M., Funk, P., & Rovatsos, M. (2000). Using Trust Detecting Deceitful Agents
Artificial Societies. Applied Artificial Intelligence, 14, 825848.
Schmidt, K. M. (1993). Reputation Equilibrium Characterization Repeated Games
Conflicting Interests. Econometrica, 61, 325351.
Selten, R. (1978). Chain-Store Paradox. Theory Decision, 9, 127159.
Yu, B., & Singh, M. (2002). Evidential Model Distributed Reputation Management.
Proceedings AAMAS, Bologna, Italy.
Yu, B., & Singh, M. (2003). Detecting Deception Reputation Management. Proceedings
AAMAS, Melbourne, Australia.

419


