Journal Artificial Intelligence Research 28 (2007) 233266

Submitted 05/06; published 3/07

Auctions Severely Bounded Communication
Liad Blumrosen

liadbl@microsoft.com

Microsoft Research
1065 La Avenida
Mountain View, CA 94043

Noam Nisan

noam.nisan@gmail.com

School Computer Science Engineering
Hebrew University
Jerusalem 91904, Israel

Ilya Segal

ilya.segal@stanford.edu

Department Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305

Abstract
study auctions severe bounds communication allowed: bidder
may transmit bits information auctioneer. consider welfare-
profit-maximizing auctions communication restriction. measures,
determine optimal auction show loss incurred relative unconstrained
auctions mild. prove non-surprising properties kinds auctions, e.g.,
optimal mechanisms bidders simply report interval valuation lies
in, well surprising properties, e.g., asymmetric auctions better
symmetric ones multi-round auctions reduce communication complexity
linear factor.

1. Introduction
Recent years seen emergence Internet platform multifaceted economic
interaction, technical level computer communication, routing, storage, computing, level electronic commerce many forms. Studying interactions
raises new questions economics necessity taking computational considerations account. paper deals one question: design
auctions optimally restricted use small amount communication.
paper studies effect severely restricting amount communication allowed
single-item auction. bidder privately knows real-valued willingness pay
item, allowed send k possible messages auctioneer, must
allocate item determine price basis messages received. (For
example, bidder may able send bits information, case k = 2t ).
simplest case k = 2, i.e., bidder sends single bit information. contrast
usual auction design formulation, bidders communicate real numbers.
communicating real number may seem excessively burdensome,
several motivations studying auctions severe restrictions communication. First, auctions used allocating low-level computing resources,
c
2007
AI Access Foundation. rights reserved.

fiBlumrosen, Nisan & Segal

use small amount computational effort. example, auction
routing single packet Internet must require little communication overhead,
certainly whole real number. Ideally, one would waste bit two
bidding information, perhaps piggy-backing unused bits packet header
existing networking protocols (such IP TCP). Second, amount communication
measures extent information revelation bidders. Usually, bidders
reluctant reveal exact private data (e.g., Rothkopf, Teisberg, & Kahn, 1990).
work studies tradeoff amount revealed data optimality
auctions. show auctions close optimal even using single Yes/No question per bidder. results applied various environments
need discretize bidding procedure; one example determining optimal bid
increment English auctions (Harstad & Rothkopf, 1994). Finally, restriction communication may sometimes viewed proxy simplicity considerations,
simple user interface small number possible payments facilitate electronic
handling. recent paper (Blumrosen & Feldman, 2006) shows ideas illustrated
work extend general mechanism-design frameworks requirement
small number actions per player natural intuitive.
examine effect severe communication bounds problem maximizing social welfare maximizing sellers expected profits (the latter
restrictions Bayesian incentive compatibility interim individual rationality
bidders, standard regularity condition distribution bidders valuations). study simultaneous mechanisms, bidders send bids
without observing actions bidders, sequential mechanisms messages may depend previous messages. find single-item auctions may
close fully optimal despite severe communication constraints. contrast
combinatorial auctions, exact even approximate efficiency known require
exponential amount communication number goods (Nisan & Segal, 2006).1
welfare maximization revenue maximization, show optimal
2-bidder auction takes simple form priority game player
highest bid wins, ties broken asymmetrically among players (i.e., players
pre-defined priority others send message). show
derive optimal values parameters priority game. optimal
mechanisms asymmetric definition, although players priori identical.
asymmetry contrast optimal mechanisms unconstrained communication,
symmetric mechanisms achieve optimal welfare (the second-price auction, Vickrey,
1961) optimal profit (the Myerson auction, Myerson, 1981, symmetric bidders).
Furthermore, show number players, allowed number messages
grows, loss due bounded communication order O( k12 ). bound tight
distributions valuations (e.g., uniform distribution). addition,
consider case number players grows player exactly two
1. several studies considering various computational considerations auction design: timing (e.g., Lavi & Nisan, 2004; Roth & Ockenfels, 2002), unbounded supply (e.g., Feigenbaum,
Papadimitriou, & Shenker, 2001; Goldberg, Hartline, & Wright, 2001; Bar-Yossef, Hildrum, & Wu, 2002),
computational complexity combinatorial auctions (see survey Cramton, Shoham, & Steinberg,
2006) more.

234

fiAuctions Severely Bounded Communication

possible messages. show priority games optimal case well,
characterize parameters optimal mechanisms show
generated simple recursive formula. offer asymptotic bound welfare
profit losses due bounded communication number players grows (it O( n1 )
uniform distribution). optimal mechanisms paper deterministic,
optimal even auctioneer allowed randomize.2
analysis implies expected well unexpected results:
Low welfare profit loss: Even severe bounds communication result
mild loss efficiency. present mechanisms welfare loss
profit loss decrease exponentially number communication bits (and
quadratically number k allowed bids). example, two bidders
whose valuations uniformly distributed [0, 1], optimal 1-bit auction brings
expected welfare 0.648, compared first-best expected welfare 0.667.
Asymmetry helps: Asymmetric auctions better symmetric ones
communication bounds. example, two bidders whose valuations
uniformly distributed [0, 1], symmetric 1-bit auctions achieve expected welfare
0.625, compared 0.648 asymmetric ones. prove welfare-
profit-maximizing auctions must discriminatory allocation payments.
Dominant-strategy incentive compatibility achieved additional
cost: auctions design dominant-strategy equilibria ex-post individually rational3 , yet optimal even without incentive constraints (for welfare
maximization), among Bayesian-Nash incentive-compatible interim individually rational auctions (for profit maximization). generalizes well-known results
case without communication constraints.
Bidding using mutually-centered thresholds optimal: show
optimal auctions k messages, bidders simply partition range valuations
k interval ranges announce interval. 2-bidder mechanisms, threshold
interesting property average value bidder
respective interval. denote threshold vectors mutually centered.
Sequential mechanisms better, linear factor: Allowing players send messages sequentially rather simultaneously achieve
higher payoff simultaneous mechanisms. However, payoff
multi-round mechanism among n players achieved simultaneous mechanism players send messages longer factor n.
result surprising light fact general restriction simultaneous
communication increase communication complexity exponentially. results
2. mechanisms optimal even auctions run repeatedly, long bidders values
uncorrelated time.
3. mechanism ex-post individually rational player never pays value. Interim individual rationality weaker property, player pay value average.
Individual rationality constraints essential study revenue maximization (otherwise,
potential revenue unbounded).

235

fiBlumrosen, Nisan & Segal

sequential mechanisms robust several aspects. allow players
send messages various sizes order, allow auctioneer
adaptively determine order size messages based history
messages. auctioneer may use randomized decisions.
Although welfare-maximizing mechanisms asymmetric, symmetric mechanisms
close optimal: show number k possible messages grows,
number players fixed, loss optimal symmetric mechanisms converges
zero rate loss efficient priority games. optimal loss
symmetric asymmetric mechanisms, however, differs constant factor.
hand, fix number messages, show optimal loss asymmetric
mechanisms converges zero asymptotically faster optimal symmetric mechanisms
(O( n1 ) compared O( logn
n ), uniform distribution).
demonstrate properties example simplest case:
2-bidder mechanism player two possible bids (i.e., 1 bit) values
distributed uniformly.
Example 1. Consider two players, Alice Bob, values uniformly distributed
[0, 1]. 1-bit auction among players described 2x2 matrix, Alice
chooses row, Bob chooses column. entry matrix specifies allocation
payments given combination bids. mechanism allowed toss coins
determine allocations. Figure 1 describes example mechanism,
denote mechanism g1 .
strategy defines player determines bid according private value.
first note g1 , players dominant strategies, i.e., strategies optimal
regardless actions players. Consider following threshold strategy:
bid 1 valuation greater 13 , else bid 0. Clearly, strategy dominant
Alice g1 : valuation smaller 13 gain negative utility
bids 1; valuation greater 31 , bidding 0 gives utility zero,
get positive utility bidding 1. Similarly, threshold strategy threshold
2
3 dominant Bob.
social welfare mechanism measures total happiness players
outcome, case, value player receives item. expected
welfare g1 , given players follow dominant strategies, easily calculated
35
54
= 0.648: players bid 0 probability 13 23 , expected welfare
case equals expected value Bob, 21 23 . Similar computations show expected
welfare indeed:







1 2 23
1
2 1 + 23
1 2 1 + 13
1
2 1 + 23
35
+ (1 )
+ (1 )
+ (1 )(1 )
=
33 2
3
3
2
3 3
2
3
3
2
54
see despite restricting communication infinite number bits
1
single bit only, relatively small welfare loss 54
incurred. course, random
allocation implemented without communication result expected
welfare 12 , may regarded naive benchmark.
236

fiAuctions Severely Bounded Communication

turns mechanism described Figure 1 maximizes expected welfare:
1-bit mechanism achieves strictly higher expected welfare pair bidders
strategies (that is, regardless concept equilibrium use). note optimal
mechanism asymmetric (a priority game) ties always broken favor Bob,
mechanism optimal even randomized decisions allowed. Note
optimal symmetric 1-bit mechanism uses randomization, achieves expected
welfare 0.625 (the mechanism illustrated Appendix A.3 see Footnote 20).
Finally, note optimal thresholds players mutually centered.
is, Alices value 13 average value Bob bids 0 Bobs value 32 average
value Alice bids 1. intuition simple: given Bob bids 0, average
value 12 23 = 13 . values Alice efficient mechanism give
item? Clearly value greater average value Bob. Therefore, Alice
use threshold 13 .

closely related work economic literature Harstad Rothkopf
(1994), considered similar questions cases restricting bid levels oral auctions
discrete levels, Wilson (1989) McAfee (2002) analyzed inefficiency
caused discrete priority classes buyers. particular, Wilson showed number k priority classes grows, efficiency loss asymptotically proportional k12 .
work Wilson buyers aggregate demand known supply uncertain,
model demand uncertain. Wilson Harstad Rothkopf restrict
attention symmetric mechanisms, show creating endogenous asymmetry
among ex ante identical buyers beneficial. Another related work Bergemann
Pesendorfer (2001), seller decide accuracy bidders know
private values. problem different ours, since bidders model know
valuations. work Parkes (2005) related. compared efficiency
simultaneous sequential auctions uncertainties values players.
Recent work studied similar discrete-bid model context ascending auctions
auctions use take-it-or-leave-it offers (Kress & Boutilier, 2004; Sandholm & Gilpin,
2006; David, Rogers, Schiff, Kraus, & Jennings, 2005).
organization paper follows: Section 2 presents model definition
introduces notations Section 3 presents characterization welfare- profitoptimal 2-bidder auctions. Section 4 characterizes optimal mechanisms arbitrary
number bidders, 2 possible bids player. Section 5 give asymptotic
analysis minimal welfare profit losses optimal mechanisms. Finally, Section
6 compares simultaneous sequential mechanisms bounded communication.

2. Model
section presents formal model notations use.
237

fiBlumrosen, Nisan & Segal

B

0
1

0

1

B wins pays 0
wins pays 13

B wins pays 0
B wins pays 23

Figure 1: (g1 ) 2-bidder 1-bit game achieves maximal expected welfare. example,
Alice (the rows bidder) bids 1 Bob bids 0, Alice wins pays 13 .

2.1 Bidders Mechanism
consider single item, sealed bid auctions among n risk-neutral players. Player
private valuation object vi [a, b].4 valuations independently drawn
cumulative probability functions . parts analysis5 , assume existence
always-positive probability density function . sometime treat seller
one bidders, numbered 0. seller constant valuation v0 item.
consider normalized model, i.e., bidders valuations item a.
novelty model, compared standard mechanism-design settings,
bidder send message ti = lg(ki ) bits mechanism, i.e., player
choose one possible ki bids (or messages). Denote possible set bids bidder
= {0, 1, 2, ..., ki 1}. auction, bidder chooses bid bi . mechanism
determine allocation payments given vector bids b = (b1 , ..., bn ):
Definition 1. mechanism g composed pair functions (a, p) where:
: (1 ... n ) [0, 1]n+1 allocation scheme (not necessarily deterministic).
denote ith coordinate a(b) ai (b), bidder probability
winning
Pn
item bidders bid b. Clearly, b ai (b) 0 b


i=0 (b) = 1.
a0 (b) > 0, seller keep item positive probability.
p : (1 ... n ) <n payment scheme. pi (b) payment ith bidder
given vector bids b.6
Definition 2. mechanism k possible bids, every bidder i, |i | = ki = k.
denote set mechanisms k possible bids among n bidders Gn,k .
denote set n-bidder mechanisms |i | = ki bidder i,
Gn,(k1 ,...,kn ) .
strategy si bidder game g Gn,(k1 ,...,kn ) describes bidder determines
bid according valuation, i.e., function si : [a, b] {0, 1, ..., ki 1}. Let
4. simplicity, use range [0, 1] parts paper. Using general interval
required, though, characterization optimal mechanisms, mainly due reduction
use maximizing revenue translates original support virtual valuations
drawn another interval.
5. is, characterization optimal mechanisms Sections 3.2 4 using
concept virtual valuation Sections 3.3 5.2
6. Note allow non-deterministic allocations, ignore non-deterministic payments (since
interested expected values, using lottery payments effect results).

238

fiAuctions Severely Bounded Communication

si denote strategies bidders except i, i.e., si = (s1 , ..., si1 , si+1 , ..., sn ).
sometimes use notation = (si , si ).
Definition 3. real vector (t0 , t1 , ..., tk ) vector threshold values t0 t1 ... tk .
Definition 4. strategy si threshold strategy based vector threshold values
(t0 , t1 , ..., tk ), every bid j {0, ..., ki 1} every valuation vi [tj , tj+1 ), bidder
bids j valuation vi , i.e., si (vi ) = j (and every vi , vi [t0 , tk ]). say
si threshold strategy, exists vector threshold values si
threshold strategy based t.
2.2 Optimality Criteria
bidders aim maximize (quasi-linear) utilities. utility bidder
loses (and pay nothing), vi pi wins pay pi . Let ui (g, s) denote
expected utility bidder game g bidders use vector strategies
(implicit utility depends value vi ).
Definition 5. strategy si bidder dominant mechanism g Gn,(k1 ,...,kn )
regardless bidders strategies si , cannot increase expected utility
deviation another strategy, i.e.,
sei si ui (g, (si , si )) ui (g, (sei , si ))
Definition 6. profile strategies = (s1 , ..., sn ) forms Bayesian-Nash equilibrium
(BNE) mechanism g Gn,(k1 ,...,kn ) , every bidder i, si best response
strategies si bidders, i.e.,
sei ui (g, (si , si )) ui (g, (sei , si ))
use standard participation constraints definitions: say profile strategies
= (s1 , ..., sn ) ex-post individually rational mechanism g, every bidder never pays
actual valuation (for realization valuations); assume
strong version definition holds even randomized mechanisms. say
strategies profile = (s1 , ..., sn ) interim individually rational mechanism g every
bidder achieves non-negative expected utility, given valuation might have,
bidders play si .
goal find optimal, communication-bounded mechanisms. mechanism
designers, try optimize social criteria welfare (efficiency) sellers
profit.
expected welfare mechanism g, bidders use strategies s,
expected social surplus. item indivisible, social surplus actually
valuation bidder receives item. seller keeps item, social welfare
v0 .
Definition 7. Let w(g, s) denote expected welfare (or expected efficiency) n-bidder
game g bidders strategies s, i.e., expected value player (possibly
opt
seller) receives item g. Let wn,(k
denote maximal possible expected
1 ,...,kn )
239

fiBlumrosen, Nisan & Segal

welfare n-bidder game bidder ki possible bids, vector
strategies allowed, i.e.,
opt
wn,(k
=
max
w(g, s)
1 ,...,kn )
gGn,(k1 ,...,kn ) ,

opt
opt
bidders k possible bids use notation wn,k
= wn,(k,...,k)

Actually, optimal welfare defined maximum expected welfare
obtained equilibrium. Since later show optimal welfare without
strategic considerations dominant-strategy implementable, use definition
simplicity. Note even absence communication restrictions, optimizing
welfare objective obtained first-best solution (using VCG scheme); profit
maximization, hand, obtained second-best solution (incentive constraints
bind Myersons auction, Myerson, 1981).
Definition 8. sellers profit payment received winning bidder, v0
seller keeps item.7 Let r(g, s) denote expected profit n-bidder game
opt
g bidders strategies s. Let rn,k
denote maximal expected profit
n-bidder mechanism k possible bids vector interim individually-rational
strategies forms Bayesian-Nash equilibrium g:
opt
rn,k
=

max
r(g, s)
g Gn,k
interim IR BNE g

Note define optimal welfare maximal welfare among mechanisms
strategies, necessarily equilibria, define optimal profit maximal
profit achievable interim-IR Bayesian-Nash equilibria mechanism. Yet, optimal
mechanisms (for measures) present paper implement optimal
values dominant strategies ex-post IR.8
Definition 9. say mechanism g Gn,k achieves optimal welfare (resp.
profit), g interim-IR Bayesian-Nash equilibrium expected welfare
opt
opt
(resp. profit) w(g, s) = wn,k
(resp. r(g, s) = rn,k
).
say mechanism g Gn,k incurs welfare loss (resp. profit loss) L,
achieves expected welfare (resp. profit) additively smaller optimal welfare (resp. profit) unbounded communication L (the optimal results unbounded
communications best results achievable interim-IR Bayesian-Nash equilibria).

3. Optimal Mechanisms Two Bidders
section present 2-bidder mechanisms bounded communication achieve
optimal welfare profit. Section 4 present characterization welfareoptimal profit-optimal n-bidder mechanisms 2 possible bids bidder.
7. v0 = 0, expected profit equivalent sellers expected revenue.
8. Note ex-ante IR, i.e., bidders know type choosing strategies, noninteresting model, since auctioneer simply ask bidder pay expected
valuation.

240

fiAuctions Severely Bounded Communication

characterization optimal mechanisms general case (n bidders k possible bids) remains open question. Anyway, asymptotic analysis optimal welfare
loss profit loss (in Section 5) holds general case, shows asymptotically
optimal mechanisms.
first show allocation rules efficient mechanisms certain structure
call priority games. term priority game means allocation rule uses
asymmetric tie breaking rule: winning player player highest priority
among bidders bid highest. One consequence bidder lowest
priority win bid strictly higher bids. Note
term priority game refers asymmetry mechanisms allocation function,
additional asymmetry appear payment scheme. modified priority game
similar allocation, except item allocated bidders bid
lowest bid.9 mostly interested mechanisms players
bid space .
Definition 10. game called priority game allocates item bidder
bids highest bid (i.e., bi > bj j 6= i, allocation ai (b) = 1 aj (b) = 0
j 6= i), ties consistently broken according pre-defined order bidders.
game called modified priority game allocation priority game,
except bidders bid 0, seller keeps item.
turns useful build payment scheme mechanisms according
given profile threshold strategies:
Definition 11. n-bidder priority game based profile threshold values vectors


= (t1 , ..., tn ) ni=1 <k+1 (where every i, ti0 ti1 ... tik ) mechanism
whose allocation priority game payment scheme follows: bidder j
wins item vector bids b pays smallest valuation might
still win item, given uses threshold strategy sj based tj , i.e, pj (b) =


min{vj |aj (sj (vj ), bj ) = 1}. denote mechanism P Gk ( ). modified priority
game similar payment rule called modified priority game based profile


threshold-value vectors, denoted P Gk ( ).
2-bidder games, may use notations P Gk (x, y), P Gk (x, y) (where x,
vectors threshold values). mechanisms P Gk (x, y) P Gk (x, y) presented Figure 2. Note P Gk (x, y) P Gk (x, y) differ bidder bids 0
(i.e., first line games matrix).
observe priority games modified priority games, payments
schemes described above, two desirable properties: admit dominantstrategy equilibrium, ex-post individually rational players follow
dominant strategies.
dominant strategies, well known result mechanism design (see Mookherjee
& Reichelstein, 1992 Lemma 1 Segal, 2003) states monotone10
9. Modified priority games viewed priority games treat seller one bidders
lowest priority (then, seller always bids second-lowest bid).
10. mechanism monotone probability bidder wins increases raises bid, fixing
bids bidders. See Definition 12 model.

241

fiBlumrosen, Nisan & Segal

allocation rule transfer (i.e., payment) rule would implement desired
allocation dominant strategies. deterministic auctions, support equilibrium,
winning bidder pay smallest valuation still wins (fixing
behavior bidders). payments Definition 11 defined way,
therefore support dominant-strategy implementation. follows threshold




strategies based threshold values vector dominant P Gk ( )


P Gk ( ). clear definition priority games modified priority games
that, playing dominant threshold strategies, winning players never pay
value, losing players pay zero. Ex-post IR follows.
Actually, observation payments lead dominant strategies even
general. observe monotone mechanisms reveal enough information, despite
communication constraints, find transfer rules support dominant-strategy
implementation. Therefore, characterizing optimal mechanisms focus
defining monotone allocation schemes communication restrictions, transfers lead dominant-strategy equilibria concluded free. words,
use 2-stage approach widely used mechanism-design literature
bounded-communication settings: first solve optimal allocation rule, construct transfers satisfy desired incentive-compatibility individual-rationality
constraints.
Remark 1. argument holds general environments: environments
player one-dimensional private value quasi-linear utility, non-monetary
allocation rule implemented dominant strategies transfers,
communication protocol11 realizing rule reveals enough information construct
supporting transfers dominant strategies. see this, recall direct-revelation
mechanisms (i.e., unbounded communication), allocation rule proves
monotonic, transfers support dominant-strategy equilibrium. transfers
defined according allocation-dependent thresholds, e.g., deterministic
allocation rule every bidder pay smallest valuation still wins.
standard revelation-principle arguments, monotonic allocation rule bounded communication mechanisms, viewed monotonic direct-revelation mechanism
unbounded communication, therefore supporting transfers exist. supporting
transfers determined changes allocation rule valuation bidder
increases, transfers change allocation rule changes. Thus, communication protocol used determining allocation, reveal transfers
support dominant-strategy implementation.
3.1 Efficiency Priority Games
characterization welfare-maximizing mechanism done two steps: first
show allocation scheme 2-bidder priority games optimal12 . Afterwards,
characterize strategies players lead welfare maximization priority
11. deal simultaneous communication, i.e., bidders send messages simultaneously. observation true sequential mechanisms (see Section 6).
12. assume, w.l.o.g., throughout paper 2-bidder priority games B A, i.e., mechanism
allocates item bids higher B, otherwise B.

242

fiAuctions Severely Bounded Communication

0
1
2
...
k-2
k-1

0
B, y0
A, x1
A, x1
...
A, x1
A, x1

1
B, y0
B, y1
A, x2
...
A, x2
A, x2

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

k-2
B, y0
B, y1
B, y2
...
B, yk2
A, xk1

k-1
B, y0
B, y1
B, y2
...
B, yk2
B, yk1

0
1
2
...
k-2
k-1

0

A, x1
A, x1
...
A, x1
A, x1

1
B, y1
B, y1
A, x2
...
A, x2
A, x2

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

k-2
B, y1
B, y1
B, y2
...
B, yk2
A, xk1

k-1
B, y1
B, y1
B, y2
...
B, yk2
B, yk1

Figure 2: priority game (left) modified priority game (right) based threshold
values vectors x, y. entry, left argument denotes winning bidder,
right argument price pays. mechanisms differ allocation all-zero
bids, payments first row.

games; complete description outcome mechanism every profile
bidder valuations. two stages take strategic behavior bidders
account. Yet, observed before, since allocation scheme proved monotone,
exists payment scheme strategies dominant.
Definition 12. mechanism g Gn,k monotone vector bids b
bidder i, probability bidder wins item cannot decrease bid
increases, i.e.,
0
0
b bi > bi ai (bi , bi ) ai (bi , bi )
following theorem prove priority games welfare maximizing.
proof composed four steps: first show assume bidders
optimal mechanisms use threshold strategies. Then, show allocation optimal mechanisms is, w.l.o.g., monotone deterministic. show optimal
mechanisms waste communication, i.e., two rows two columns
allocation matrix optimal mechanism identical. Finally, use properties,
together several combinatorial arguments, derive optimality priority games.
Theorem 3.1. (Priority games efficiency) every pair distribution functions
opt
bidders valuations, every v0 , optimal welfare (i.e., w2,k
) achieved
either priority game modified priority game (with pair threshold strategies).
Proof. first prove theorem given seller low reservation value, i.e.,
v0 a. Recall point aim find welfare-maximizing allocation scheme,
without taking incentives bidders account. proof uses following
three claims. later use, Claims 3.2 3.3 proved n players.
Claim 3.2. (Optimality threshold strategies) Given mechanism g Gn,(k1 ,...,kn ) ,
exists vector threshold strategies achieve optimal welfare g among
possible strategies, i.e., w(g, s) = maxse w(g, se).
Proof. (sketch - formal proof given Appendix A.1)
Given profile welfare-maximizing strategies g, modify strategy
bidder (w.l.o.g., bidder 1) threshold strategy maintaining least expected
welfare. idea fixing strategies s1 bidders, expected welfare
243

fiBlumrosen, Nisan & Segal

achieved bidder 1 bids bid b1 linear function bidder value v1 .
maximum linear functions piecewise-linear function, specifies
optimal welfare function v1 . Bidder 1 use threshold strategy according
breaking points piecewise-linear function choose welfare-maximizing linear
function segment. Clearly, k 1 breaking points.
Claim 3.3. (Optimality deterministic, monotone mechanisms) every n
k1 , ..., kn , exists mechanism g Gn,(k1 ,...,kn ) optimal welfare (i.e., exists
opt
profile strategies w(g, s) = wn,(k
) monotone, deterministic
1 ,...,kn )
(i.e., winner fixed combination bids) seller never keeps
item.
Proof. Consider mechanism g Gn,(k1 ,...,kn ) profile strategies maximize
opt
expected welfare, is, w(g, s) = wn,(k
. social planner, aiming maximize
1 ,...,kn )
welfare, always allocate item bidder highest expected valuation.
is, combination bids b = (b1 , .., bn ) allocate item (i.e., ai (b) = 1)
bidder argmaxj (E(vj |sj (vj ) = bj )). expected welfare clearly
decrease. addition, always allocate item (we assume v0 a),
allocation deterministic. Finally, assume, w.l.o.g., bidder bids
names (i.e., 0,1 etc.) ordered according expected value bidder has.
Then, mechanism monotone: winning bidder increases bid,
expected valuation increase, expected welfare bidders
change. Thus, bidder still maximal expected valuation.
Claim 3.4. (Additional bids strictly help) Consider deterministic, monotone mechanism g G2,k seller never keeps item. g achieves optimal expected
welfare, matrix representation g two rows (or columns) identical
allocation scheme.
Proof. idea optimal protocol exploits communication resources intuitive, although hold settings (a trivial example calculating parity
two binary numbers, involved examples found Kushilevitz & Nisan, 1997).
simple proof statement model, proof based
Lemma A.1 appendix following way: Consider optimal mechanism
g G2,k two identical rows. mechanism achieves optimal welfare
players use profile strategies s. gs monotonicity implies two identical rows
adjacent. Thus, mechanism ge G2,(k1,k) k 1 possible bids
rows bidder achieves exactly expected welfare g (when identical
rows united one). welfare achieved strategies bidders,
rows player bids united row instead two identical rows. claim
follow Lemma A.1 appendix. According lemma, optimal welfare
game bidders k possible bids cannot achieved one
opt
opt
bidders k 1 possible bids (i.e., w2,k
> w2,(k1,k)
).
Now, due Claim 3.3, deterministic, monotone game item
opt
must sold achieves w2,k
. games, allocation scheme row looks
244

fiAuctions Severely Bounded Communication

[A, ..., A, B...B]. Due Claim 3.4, matrix representation optimal game,
two rows allocation scheme. k+1 possible monotone
rows game matrix (with prefix 0 k As), mechanism k rows.
Similarly, k different columns (of possible k+1) mechanism. Assume
row [B, B, ..., B] g. Then, column [A, A, ..., A] clearly g. Therefore,
game matrix consists columns except [A, A, ..., A], compose priority
game B A. row [B, B, ..., B] g, g priority game
B.
Next, complete proof sellers valuation v0 . Consider mechanism h G2,k
pair threshold strategies based threshold-value vectors x
e, ye achieve
optimal welfare among mechanisms strategies (due Claim 3.2, strategies
exist). modify h, expected welfare (with x
e, ye) decrease. Let
smallest index E(vA |f
xa vA xg
)

v
.
Let
b smallest index
a+1
0
E(vB |yeb vB yg
b+1 ) v0 . = 0 b = 0, item never allocated
seller, efficient mechanism v0 a.
a, b > 0, consider vector bids (i, j). < j < b, expected
valuations B smaller v0 . Thus, seller keep item
optimal welfare. < j b, expected welfare bidder B v0 ,
expected welfare v0 , thus allocate item B welfare
decrease. Similarly, allocate item j < b. < a,
allocation done regardless i, thus assume xa first threshold (i.e.,
= 1), similarly b = 1.
Now, show optimal allocation combinations bids (i, j)
j b. Here, item allocated seller, actually perform auction
k 1 possible bids bidder, bidders valuation range [f
x1 , 1],
[ye1 , 1]. Note proof (above) case v0 holds ranges,
optimal welfare achieved priority game. Altogether, optimal mechanism turns
modified priority game.
3.2 Efficient 2-bidder Mechanisms k Possible Bids
Now, finally characterize efficient mechanisms model. turns
optimal threshold values priority games mutually centered, i.e., threshold
expected valuation bidder, given valuation bidder
lies two adjacent thresholds.
Definition 13. threshold values x = (x0 , x1 , ..., xk1 , xk ), = (y0 , y1 , ..., yk1 , yk )
bidders A, B respectively mutually centered, following constraints hold:
R yi
yi1 fB (vB ) vB dvB
1 k 1 xi = E(vB |yi1 vB yi ) =
F (y ) FB (yi1 )
R xBi+1
fA (vA ) vA dvA
xi
1 k 1 yi = E(vA |xi vA xi+1 ) =
FA (xi+1 ) FA (xi )


easy see given pair distribution functions, pair
x,
mutuallycentered vectors uniquely defined (when xk = yk and, w.l.o.g., y1 x1 ). basic
245

fiBlumrosen, Nisan & Segal

idea x1 known, clearly calculate y1 (the smallest value solves
x1 = EvB (vB |y0 vB y1 )). Similarly, easy see variables xi yi
considered continuous, monotone functions x1 . Now, let z solution
equation yk1 = E(vA |xk1 vA z). satisfying 2(k 1) equations, z must
equal xk . Since z continuous monotone function x1 , single value
x1 equations hold.
following intuition shows optimal thresholds priority games must
mutually centered: Assume Alice bids i, is, value range [xi , xi+1 ].
monotone mechanism, mechanism designer decide minimal value
Bob wins Alice bids i. value Bob least average value Alice,
given bids i, Bob clearly receive item. Therefore, Bobs threshold
exactly expected value Alice. proof handle subtleties
intuition suffice (like characterization first thresholds
optimal modified priority games, see below), thus derive mutually-centered
condition solution optimization problem.
w
w
w
w = (a = w , w , ..., w , w = b)
Let xw = (a = xw
0 , x1 , ..., xk1 , xk = b)
0
1
k1 k
w
mutually-centered threshold values (w.l.o.g., y1 xw
1 ).
Let x = (a = x0 , x1 , ..., xk1 , xk = b) = (a = y0 , y1 , ..., yk1 , yk = b) two thresholdvalue vectors following constraints hold:
(x1 , ..., xk1 , b) (y1 , ..., yk1 , b) mutually-centered vectors13 .


Rx
x1 = v0 y1 = FA 1(x2 ) v0 FA (v0 ) + x12 vA fA (vA )dvA
following theorem says valuation seller item (v0 ) small
enough (e.g., a), efficient mechanism priority game based xw w (which
mutually centered). Otherwise, optimal welfare achieved modified priority
game based x y.
Theorem 3.5. pair distribution functions bidders valuations,
sellers valuation v0 item, mechanism P Gk (xw , w ) mechanism
opt
P Gk (x, y) achieves optimal welfare (i.e., w2,k
). particular, P Gk (xw , w ) achieves
optimal welfare v0 = a.
Proof. First, prove P Gk (xw , w ) optimal v0 = a. According Theorem
3.1 pair threshold values vectors x = (x0 , x1 , ..., xk ),y = (y0 , y1 , ..., yk )
P Gk (x, y) achieves optimal welfare. Note x0 = y0 = xk = yk = b,
2(k 1) variables optimize.
calculate total expected welfare summing first expected welfare
entries game matrix B wins item, summing entries
winner.
R yi
k
X
fB (vB )vB dvB

w(g, s) =
(FB (yi ) FB (yi1 )) (FA (xi ) FA (x0 )) i1
FB (yi ) FB (yi1 )
i=1

13. Again, unique solution exists when, w.l.o.g., y2 x2

246

fiAuctions Severely Bounded Communication

+

k
X

R xi
(FA (xi ) FA (xi1 )) (FB (yi1 ) FB (y0 ))

i=2

=

k
X

Z
FA (xi )

i=1

yi

yi1

fB (vB )vB dvB +

k
X

Z
FB (yi1 )

i=2

xi1

fA (vA )vA dvA

FA (xi ) FA (xi1 )

xi

xi1

fA (vA )vA dvA

assume probability density function exists bidder. Thus,
express partial derivatives respect variables:
Z
!
yi

0

(w(g, s))xi =

yi1

Z

0

(w(g, s))yi =

fB (vB )vB dvB

xi+1

xi

fA (xi ) + fA (xi ) xi FB (yi1 ) fA (xi ) xi FB (yi ) = 0


fA (vA )vA dvA fB (yi ) + fB (yi ) yi FA (xi ) fB (yi ) yi FA (xi+1 ) = 0

Rearranging terms derives yi = EvA (vA |xi vA xi+1 )
xi = EvB (vB |yi1 vB yi ) therefore, x, mutually centered optimal
efficiency.
Now, longer assume v0 = a: According Theorem 3.1, optimal welfare
achieved priority game above, achieved modified priority game.
threshold values vectors x, y, expected welfare P Gk (x, y) given
formula:
Z b
Z b
vB fB (vB )dvB + FB (y1 )
vA fA (vA )dvA
FA (x1 ) FB (y1 ) v0 + FA (x1 )
+
+

k
X
i=2
k
X
i=3

Z
(FA (xi ) FA (x1 ))

y1

yi

yi1

Z
(FB (yi1 ) FB (y1 ))

x1

vB fB (vB )dvB

xi

xi1

vA fA (vA )dvA

First-order condition similarly derive constraints x1 y1 given definition x, y, (x1 , ..., xk1 , xk ) (y1 , ..., yk1 , yk ) mutually-centered14 .
demonstrate characterization given showing explicit solution
case uniformly-distributed valuations [0, 1].
Corollary 3.6. bidders valuations distributed uniformly [0, 1] v0 = 0,
mechanism P Gk (x, y) achieves optimal welfare
x = (0,

1
3
2k 3
,
, ...,
, 1) ,
2k 1 2k 1
2k 1

= (0,

2
4
2k 2
,
, ...,
, 1)
2k 1 2k 1
2k 1

14. results surprising, since except case one bidders bids 0, priority
games allocation optimal threshold values must mutually centered (due first
part proof).

247

fiBlumrosen, Nisan & Segal

Proof. According Theorem 3.5 optimal welfare achieved P Gk (x, y), x,
mutually centered. uniform distributions, derives following constraints,
i+1
given vectors x, unique solution: 1ik1 xi = yi12+yi
yi = xi +x
2
see constraints implied, note conditional expectation
second players value, given value uniformly distributed yi1 yi ,
exactly yi12+yi .
1
y1 = x12+1 , implying
example, k = 2 constraints x1 = 0+y
2
x1 = 1/3 y1 = 2/3 optimal 1-bit mechanism Example 1.
optimal mutually-centered thresholds k = 4 are, instance, x = (0, 71 , 37 , 75 , 1)
= (0, 72 , 47 , 76 , 1).

3.3 Profit-Optimal 2-bidder Mechanisms k Possible Bids
Now, present profit-maximizing 2-bidder mechanisms. results literature
profit-maximizing auctions assume distribution functions bidders valuations
regular (as defined below). valuations bidders distributed
regular distribution function, well known Vickreys 2nd-price auction,
appropriately chosen reservation price, profit-optimal (Vickrey, 1961; Myerson, 1981;
Riley & Samuelson, 1981) unbounded communication.
Definition 14. (Myerson, 1981) Let f probability density function, let F
cumulative function. say f regular, function
ve(v) = v

1 F (v)
f (v)

monotone, strictly increasing function v. call function ve() virtual valuation
bidder.
example, bidders valuations distributed uniformly [0, 1], bidder
valuation v virtual valuation ve(v) = 2v 1.
Definition 15. virtual surplus game virtual valuation bidder (including seller15 ) receives item.
key observation work Myerson (1981), use,
Bayesian-Nash equilibrium, expected profit equals expected virtual surplus (in interim individually-rational equilibria losing bidders getting surplus).
use property reduce profit-optimization problem welfare-optimization problem, already given full solution. Myersons observation originally
proved direct-revelation mechanisms. observe Myersons observation
holds auctions bounded communication. is, given k-bid mechanism,
expected profit every Bayesian-Nash equilibrium equals expected virtual surplus.
Proposition 3.7. Let g Gn,k mechanism Bayesian Nash equilibrium =
(s1 , ..., sn ) interim individual rationality. Then, expected revenue achieved
g equal expected virtual surplus g.
15. sellers virtual valuation defined original valuation (v0 ).

248

fiAuctions Severely Bounded Communication

Proof. Consider following direct-revelation mechanism gd : player bids true
valuation vi . mechanism calculates si (vi ) every i, determines allocation
payments according g. easy observation gd incentive compatible (i.e.,
truthful bidding Bayesian-Nash equilibrium players) interim individually
rational. According Myerson observation direct revelation mechanisms, expected
revenue gd equal expected virtual surplus. However, every combination
bids, mechanism output identical allocations payments. Thus, expected
revenue expected virtual surplus equal mechanisms.
According Theorem 3.5, optimal welfare achieved either priority game
modified priority game. model bidders consider virtual valuations
valuations, let P G(e
x, ye) P G(x, y) mechanisms candidates
achieve optimal welfare (see Theorem 3.5 full characterization). Now, consider
mechanisms, except payment e
c replaced respective true valuation c = ve1 (e
c) (i.e., e
c = ve(c) ). Denote mechanisms P Gk (xR , R ), P Gk (xr , r ).
mechanisms achieve optimal profit (original) model. Note distribution functions must regular (but necessarily identical) reduction
work.
Theorem 3.8. bidders valuations distributed regular distribution functions, mechanism P Gk (xr , r ) mechanism P Gk (xR , R ) (see definitions above)
achieve optimal expected profit among profits achievable interim-IR Bayesianopt
Nash equilibrium mechanism G2,k (i.e., r2,k
).
x, ye) (x, y) defined above. mechanism
Proof. Consider threshold-value vectors (e
P G(e
x, ye) efficient model bidders consider virtual valuations
valuation (the proof holds P G(x, y) efficient mechanism). density
function f regular, therefore virtual valuation ve() strictly increasing. Thus,
P Gk (xr , r ) (when bidders use original valuations) exactly
allocation every combination bids P Gk (e
x, ye) (when bidders consider
virtual valuations valuations). conclude P Gk (xr , r ) achieves optimal
expected virtual surplus thus optimal profit.
case welfare optimization, give explicit solution case
uniform distribution functions. direct corollary Theorem 3.8. Note
optimal profit achieved modified priority game. holds since uniform
distribution bidders expected virtual valuation negative bid 0,
efficient mechanism sell item bidders bid 0.
Corollary 3.9. bidders valuations distributed uniformly [0, 1] v0 = 0,
modified priority game P Gk (x, y) achieves optimal expected profit among
profits achievable interim-IR Bayesian-Nash equilibria mechanisms G2,k ,
1
1 (1 )
(2k 5) (1 )
x = (0, , +
, ..., +
, 1)
2
2k 3
2k 3
= (0, , +

2 (1 )
(2k 4) (1 )
, ..., +
, 1)
2k 3
2k 3
249

fiBlumrosen, Nisan & Segal

=


2+ 1+3
2(1)

=

1
(2k3)2

( =

5
8

k=2).

4. Optimal Mechanisms n Bidders Two Possible Bids
section consider games among n bidders bidder 2 possible bids
(i.e., send 1 bit mechanism). give characterization optimal
mechanisms general distribution functions. characterization optimal n-bidder
mechanism k possible bids seems harder, remains open question.
difficulty stems fact monotonicity allocation rule dictate
exact allocation rule general case. Rather, many possible allocation
schemes cannot rule know strategies bidders.16 Therefore,
seems one solve involved combinatorial problem finding optimal
allocation rule together finding optimal payments. Priority games 2 possible
bids per player interpreted sequence take-it-or-leave-it offers; player
highest priority interpretation first player offered, accepts
offer (i.e., bids 1) receive it. See work Sandholm Gilpin (2006)
analysis take-it-or-leave-it mechanisms. Moreover, 1-bit priority games actually
solution full-information version secretary problem (e.g., Gilbert & Mosteller,
1966; Ajtai, Megiddo, & Waarts, 2001). decision maker meets players (or potential
secretaries hired), one another, search player highest
value. decision maker knows underlying probability distributions. decision,
however, made online player receive item upon arrival
never receive item.
4.1 Characterization Optimal Mechanisms
first observe priority games maximize welfare n-bidder games 2 possible bids. easier see k-possible-bids case. Claim 3.2 Theorem 3.1,
bidders use threshold strategies. efficient mechanism allocate item,


combination bids b , bidder highest
bids bi.


expected welfare
Given distributions i.i.d, xi xj E vi vi [xi , b] E vj vj [xj , b]
E (vi |vi [a, xi ] ) E (vj |vj [a, xj ] ). Therefore, ties broken according
order thresholds. sellers reservation price v0 high enough, efficient
mechanism modified priority game.17
show characterization optimal thresholds priority games.
show optimal mechanisms use fully discriminatory payments: bidder
highest priority priority game pays highest payment wins, forth.
optimal modified priority game given simple recursive formula. seller
allocates item bids zero, constraints become cyclic.
16. Consider, example, 3-bidder 3-bid priority game, item allocated player
second-highest priority players bid highest bid. mechanism monotone
identical actions players.
17. see this, must note efficient mechanism seller never keep item one
bidder bids 1 (then, threshold higher v0 bidder gain higher welfare).

250

fiAuctions Severely Bounded Communication



Let
x = (x1 , ..., xn )
= (y1 , ..., yn ) profiles threshold values n
bidders following constraints hold:

1mn2

1mn2

x1 = E (v |a v xn )


xm+1 = (1 F (xm )) E v v [xm , b] + F (xm ) xm


Pn1 Qn1

i=1 ( j=i+1 F (xj )) (1 F (xi )) E v v [xi , b]
xn =
Q
1 n1
i=1 F (xi )
y1 = v 0


ym+1 = (1 F (ym )) E v v [ym , b] + F (ym ) ym

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)



prove either mechanism P G2 (
x ) mechanism P G2 (
) achieve
optimal welfare. thresholds description shows, thresholds modified
priority game (i.e., seller keeps item bids zero) defined
simple, easy-to-compute recursive formula. optimality thresholds
shown following intuitive argument: Consider new bidder joins set 1
bidders. efficient auction allocate item bidder value
greater optimal welfare achievable first 1 bidders. Therefore,
threshold bidder equal optimal welfare gained preceding bidders;
indeed, probability 1 F (yi1 ), bidder valuation greater
expected
bidders (yi1 ) average contribution

welfare attained
E v v [ym , b] ); probability F (yi1 ) contribute optimal
welfare remains yi1 . intuition shows profit-maximizing thresholds
(Equations 4,5) independent number players, enables online
implementation profit-maximizing auctions.
Theorem 4.1. bidders valuations distributed distribution func

tion, mechanism P G2 (
x ) mechanism P G2 (
) achieves optimal expected

welfare. particular, v0 = a, P G2 (
x ) efficient mechanism.
Proof. already observed exists priority game achieves optimal
welfare threshold strategies. Consider priority game among n bidders, indexed
priorities (i.e., 1 2... n ). Every bidder wins item bids 1

Qthe bidderswith higher priorities bid 0. Thus, probability bidder wins
n
j=i+1 F (xj ) (1 F (xi )). bidders bid 0, either bidder n wins seller
keeps item herself. expected welfare game, bidders use
threshold strategies x1 , ..., xn is:


n
!
Rb
n
n


X
f (vi )vi dvi
x


F (xj ) (1 F (xi ))
+
F (xi ) E0
w(g, s) =
(1 F (xi ))
i=1

j=i+1

i=1

E0 = E(vn |vn [a, xn ]) priority game Eo = v0 modified priority
game (the second term relates case bidders bid 0). maximum,
partial derivatives respect x1 , ..., xn equal zero, resulting characterization
optimal solution.
251

fiBlumrosen, Nisan & Segal

bidders 1 n 1 get xm equals (both priority game
modified priority game):




m1
m1
X m1






F (xj ) (1 F (xi )) E vi vi [xi , b] +
F (xi ) E (vn |vn [a, xn ] )
i=1

j=i+1

i=1,i6=m

recursive formula reached calculating xm+1 xm , Equations 2
5 follow. bidder n priority game first order conditions yield constraint
Equation 3. = 1, x1 = E (vn |a vn xn ) (in priority game)
x1 = v0 (in modified priority game).
Section 3, characterize profit optimal mechanism reduction
welfare optimizing problem. Again, reduction performed regular distributions. Consider model bidders take virtual valuations valuations.
Let P G2 (e
u) P G2 (e
z ) mechanisms achieve optimal welfare model
(see Theorem 4.1 above). Let P G2 (u) P G2 (z) similar mechanisms respectively,
except payment e
c replaced respective original valuation c = ve1 (e
c).
Theorem 4.2. bidders valuations distributed regular distribution function, mechanism P G2 (u) mechanism P G2 (z) achieves optimal
expected profit among profits achievable Bayesian-Nash equilibrium interim IR.
Proof. corollary Theorem 4.1. reduction done Theorem 3.8,
possible due regularity distribution function.
Again, optimal thresholds modified priority game given simple
recursive formula intuitive meaning. recursion identical welfare optimizing formula (Equation 2), difference value first threshold
hold y1 = ve1 (v0 ). intuition given best revenue achievable
first 1 bidders yi1 , probability F (yi1 ) new player
able pay higher price (due individual-rationality restriction) therefore
optimal revenue remains yi1 . value greater yi1 , cannot charged
average value (E(v|yi1 v b)).
Now, give explicit solutions uniform distribution support [0, 1].
following recursive constraints characterize efficient profit-optimal mechanisms
constraints given Theorems 4.1 4.2 uniform distributions.
Let (x1 , ..., xn ) [0, 1]n threshold values following constraints hold:
x1 =
{1, ..., n 2}

xm+1 =
xn =

252

xn
2
1 x2m
+
2
2
Pn1 Qn1



x
1 x2i
j=i+1 j
i=1

Qn1
2 1 i=1
xi

(6)
(7)
(8)

fiAuctions Severely Bounded Communication

Let = (y1 , ..., yn ) [0, 1]n threshold values y1 =
{1, ..., n 2}

ym+1 =

1
2

and:

2
1 ym
+
2
2



Corollary 4.3. Consider threshold values
x = (x1 , ..., xn )
= (y1 , ..., yn ) defined

above. bidders valuations distributed uniformly [0, 1] v0 = 0, P G2 (
x)


achieves optimal welfare P G2 ( ) achieves optimal profit.
example, n = 5 = (0.5, 0.625, 0.695, 0.741, 0.775).
description simpler closed-form formulae could find.

5. Asymptotic Analysis Welfare Profit Losses
section, measure performance optimal mechanisms presented earlier
sections. Although present characterization optimal mechanisms
general model k possible bids n bidders, present mechanisms general
case asymptotically optimal. simplicity, assume valuations range
[0, 1] (all results apply general range [a, b] changes constants
analysis).
analyze welfare loss (Subsection 5.1), profit loss (Subsection 5.2), finally,
Subsection 5.3 measure profit loss welfare loss 1-bit mechanism
n bidders. result asymptotic respect amount communication,
except Section 5.3 respect number bidders.
5.1 Asymptotic Bounds Welfare Loss
next theorem shows matter bidders valuations distributed,
always construct mechanisms welfare loss incur diminishes quadratically
k. true number bidders fix (when k > 2n). particular, efficient
mechanism presented Theorem 3.5 incurs welfare loss O( k12 ). intuition behind
proof: given distribution functions bidders, construct certain threshold
strategy, dominant bidders. using strategy, bidder
bid bid probability smaller k1 . way, probability welfare loss
may occur O( k1 ) (for two players, instance, welfare loss possible
diagonal games matrix). average welfare loss O( k1 ), resulting
total expected loss O( k12 ).
Theorem 5.1. (fixed) number bidders n, set distribution functions
bidders valuations, exist set mechanisms gk Gn,k (k = 2n + 1, 2n + 2, ...),
incur expected welfare loss O( k12 )). results implemented dominant
strategies ex-post individual rationality.
requirement k > 2n (here Proposition 5.3 below) due construction symmetric mechanism following proof. results hold even without
requirement, shown asymmetric construction general setting
work Blumrosen Feldman (2006).
253

fiBlumrosen, Nisan & Segal

Proof. proofs idea: construct priority game bidders
dominant threshold strategy, probability bidder bid bid smaller
nk . done dividing density functions bidders nk intervals
equal mass, combining thresholds vector k threshold values.
bidders use threshold strategy, welfare loss possible one
bidder bids highest bid. observation leads upper bound.

P
Let 1 , ..., n integers ni=1 = k 2, every i, nk 1
(clearly numbers exist). every bidder i, let = (y1i , ..., yi ) set threshold
values divide distribution function + 1 segments mass (when
y0i = 0, yi +1 = 1), i.e., every bid j, (yj+1 ) (yj ) = i1+1 .


Let X = { ni=1 } {v0 }, |X| = k 1, union threshold values (we add
arbitrary threshold values size X smaller k 1). Let x = (0, x1 , ..., xk1 , 1)
threshold-value vector created ordering threshold values X smallest
largest. Now, consider n-bidder mechanism P Gk (e
t) e
= (x, .., x). threshold
strategy based x dominant bidders, ex-post IR. construction
18
sets 1 , ..., n , every bidder bid particular bid w.p. 2n
k .
Next, bound welfare loss. divide possible cases according
number bidders bid highest bid. Since bidders use threshold
strategy, one bidder bids highest bid, welfare loss incurred (he definitely
highest valuation). 1 bidder bid highest bid i, expected welfare
loss exceed xi+1 xi . set bidders N , denote probability
bidders bid P r(T = i), probability bidders
bids smaller P r(N \ < i). Thus, expected welfare loss smaller (when
2n < k):
n
X

X

k
X

P r(T = i)P r(N \ < i) (xi+1 xi )

j=2 N, |T |=j i=1



n
X

X

k
X

P r(T = i) (xi+1 xi )

j=2 N, |T |=j i=1



(nj) k j
n X
X
X 2n
j=2

1

i=1

k

(xi+1 xi )

=


n
X
n
2n j
j=2

j

k

<

2n 4n2

1
k2

valuations bidders smaller v0 , welfare loss (it
easy see assume, w.l.o.g., x1 = v0 ). Note despite coefficient
1
exponential n, consider constant n fixed. Example,
k2
n = 2 similar proof shows welfare loss smaller k82 (when k > 3).
Asymptotic quadratic bounds given Wilson (1989), studied similar
settings regarding effect discrete priority classes customers. work Wilson
uncertainty supply, paper demand uncertain well.
results illustrations idea deadweight loss second order
18. every bidder i, every bid j, (xj+1 ) (xj )

254

1
kc
bn



2n
k

fiAuctions Severely Bounded Communication

price distortion. (The price distortion model maximum difference
prices different bidders facing item given others bids,
bounded k1 .) Indeed, small price distortion ensures probability
inefficient allocation small inefficiency small occur.
Theorem 5.1 related proposition 4 paper Nisan Segal (2006). Nisan
Segal showed discretizing exactly efficient continuous protocol communicating
real numbers yields truly polynomial approximation scheme proportional
(i.e., > 0 realize approximation factor 1 using number
bits polynomial log(1 ) ). Here, discretize continuous efficient auction
(e.g., first-price auction), number bidders. Discretization achieves
approximation error exponential (minus) number bits sent per bidder, i.e.,
asymptotically proportional k1 . However, care average-case approximation
even closer, worst-case approximation within error ensures
average case approximation within 2 (the probability error made
order ).
show asymptotic upper bound tight, i.e., distribution
functions (and particular, uniform distribution) minimal welfare loss exactly
proportional k12 . show constant number bidders.
Theorem 5.2. Assume bidders valuations uniformly distributed v0 =
0. Then, efficient 2-bidder mechanism P Gk (x, y) described Corollary 3.6 incurs
1
welfare loss exactly 6(2k1)
2 . Moreover, (fixed) number bidders n
v0 , exists positive constant c mechanism g Gn,k incurs welfare
loss c k12 .
Proof. first prove first part theorem, regarding 2-bidder mechanisms. Note
given mechanism make non-optimal allocation combinations bids
diagonal lower secondary diagonal matrix representation
2-bidder game (i.e., bA = bB bA = bB + 1). bids (i, j),
1
overlapping segment [xi , xi+1 ] [yj , yj+1 ] size 2k1
. Given vector bids
(i, j), one valuations overlapping segment, allocation optimal
(note allocate item B main diagonal, secondary
1
diagonal). probability valuation overlapping range (2k1)
2.
expected valuation priority game (when valuation overlapping
segment) exactly middle segment. expected valuation optimal
auction (with unbounded communications), restricted overlapping interval,
1
23 point range. Thus, welfare loss 16 segment, i.e., 61 2k1
. Thus,
every vector bids main diagonal secondary-diagonal expected
1
welfare loss 61 (2k1)
3 . (2k 1) vector bids, thus total welfare loss
exactly

1
.
6(2k1)2

similar argument shows even sellers valuation v0 non zero, welfare
1
loss asymptotically greater (2k1)
2 : let z1 , ..., zm sizes overlapping
segments (only valuations bidders greater v0 ). Clearly, 2k1
255

fiBlumrosen, Nisan & Segal



Pm

i=1 zi

1. Then, welfare loss game least

(1 v0 )2


X
i=1

zi2

19 :


zi
(1 v0 )2 X 3 (1 v0 )2 2k 1
(1 v0 )2
1
=

zi

3
6
6
6
(2k 1)
6
(2k 1)2
i=1

proof second statement easily derived: Consider case bidders
1 2 valuations 12 , rest bidders valuations 12 .
occurs constant probability 21n . best mechanism always
allocate item one 1 2. due first part theorem, 2-bidder
mechanism welfare loss proportional k12 incurred (the fact valuation
range [ 12 , 1] [0, 1] changes constant c). hold opportunity
cost v0 seller. Thus, mechanism incur welfare loss ( k12 ).
Note asymptotic results hold even restrict attention symmetric
mechanisms. Actually, prove upper bound Theorem 5.1 constructing symmetric mechanism (we allocate item bidders bid highest bid
equal probabilities). However, asymmetric mechanisms incur strictly smaller welfare
loss symmetric mechanisms. example, valuations distributed uni1
formly, optimal welfare loss 6(2k1)
2 (by Theorem 5.2) compared optimal

welfare loss 6k12 attained symmetric mechanisms20 (i.e., welfare loss asymmetric
mechanisms 4 times better). observation interesting light results
Harstad Rothkopf (1994) Wilson (1989). Harstad Rothkopf studied symmetric
English auctions, analyzed optimal price-jumps auctions. results show
non-anonymous prices (i.e., different jumps bidder) achieve better results
symmetric (or anonymous) jumps. characterize optimal price-jumps
auctions (mutually centered threshold values). Wilson studied symmetric
priority classes model, gives convergence rate n12 efficiency loss
(where n number priority classes). show asymmetric mechanisms
incur smaller efficiency loss, although asymptotic convergence rate same.
One obvious drawback characterization optimal mechanisms
design detail-free (as Wilsons doctrine) must know priors
bidders designing mechanisms. design mechanism regardless
distribution functions, always incur low welfare loss? answer
can, efficient commonly-known priors case. observe
simple, symmetric mechanism use equally spaced thresholds (i.e., P Gk (x, ..., x),
1
x = (0, k1 , k2 , ..., k1
k , 1) ), incurs welfare loss greater k possible distribution
functions. hard verify actually best done
detail-free mechanism: mechanism exist distribution functions
expected welfare loss least order k1 . severely low communication,
difference detail-free mechanisms prior-aware mechanisms (with loss
19.
use fact z = (z1 , ..., zm ) mth dimensional simplex,
Pmthe 3left inequality
1
i=1 zi m2 .
20. easy show efficient symmetric mechanisms similar priority games, except item
allocated equal probabilities cases ties. thresholds bidders simply divide
valuations range identical segments. Then, straightforward show welfare loss
exactly 6k12 .

256

fiAuctions Severely Bounded Communication

O( k12 ) ) may substantial. Note without communication constraints, socially-efficient
results achieved detail-free mechanisms second-price (Vickrey) auctions.
5.2 Asymptotic Bounds Profit Loss
done Theorem 3.8, profit optimization problem reduced welfareoptimization problem maximizing expected virtual surplus.
Proposition 5.3. Assume bidders valuations distributed regular distribution functions. Then, number bidders n, exist set mechanisms gk Gn,k
(k = 2n + 1, 2n + 2, ...) incur profit loss O( k12 ). profit loss compared
optimal, individually-rational mechanism unconstrained communication.
Proof. Consider model bidders consider virtual valuations vei (vi )
valuations. range valuations model, take union ranges
bidders virtual valuations. Denote range [, ]. Let ge Gn,k
mechanism achieves maximal welfare model. Due Theorem 5.1, ge incurs
welfare loss smaller c k12 , positive constant c (the constant takes
account size virtual valuations range ). Let g mechanism
allocation ge, payment qei bidder ge replaced qi = vei 1 (qei )
g, i.e., qei = vei (qi ). Since vei non-decreasing (by regularity), allocation
rules g ge identical every bids combination. Thus, g achieves maximal
expected virtual surplus, loss expected virtual surplus smaller c k12 .
proposition follows.
Again, upper bound asymptotically tight: uniform distribution,
mechanism incurs profit loss ( k12 ). result derived Theorem 5.2 using
similar arguments Proposition 5.3.
Proposition 5.4. Assume bidders valuations distributed uniformly. Then,
(fixed) number bidders n, exists positive constant c mechanism
g Gn,k incurs profit loss c k12 .
far, assumed bidders valuations drawn statistically independent distributions. point relaxation general joint distributions
non-interesting model. Specifically, show trivial priority game
bidders use threshold strategy based vector x = (0, k1 , k2 , ..., k1
k , 1)
always incurs expected welfare loss smaller k1 , mechanism asymptotically better. words, exists joint distribution function
mechanism incurs welfare loss proportional k1 .
5.3 Asymptotic Bounds Growing Number Bidders
subsection, fix size communication allowed (to two possible bids),
show asymptotic bounds function number bidders rather amount
communication. Unfortunately, able prove bounds
uniform distribution.
257

fiBlumrosen, Nisan & Segal

restrict attention symmetric mechanisms, solution simple. Using
1
threshold x = n n1 (for bidders) achieves maximal expected welfare,
21
exact formula showing optimal welfare loss O( logn
n ).
show optimal asymmetric mechanisms incur asymptotically smaller welfare
profit losses O( n1 ). mechanisms fully discriminate agents.


Theorem 5.5. Consider mechanisms P G2 (
x ) P G2 (
) described Corollary
4.3 (in Section 4.1). bidders valuations distributed uniformly, welfare


loss P G2 (
x ) profit loss P G2 (
) smaller n9 .
Proof. Let x revenue-optimizing thresholds Corollary 4.3. bound
welfare loss P G2 (x), efficient mechanism incur even smaller loss. assume,
w.l.o.g., g, bidders indexed according priorities (i.e., 1 2... n ).
bidder wins bidding 1, maximal welfare loss 1 xi . bidders
bid 0, use trivial upper bound 1 welfare loss . Therefore, bound
welfare loss with:


n
n
n
X




xj (1 xi ) (1 xi ) +
xi
(9)
i=1

j=i+1

i=1

following two claims easily verified induction:
Claim 5.6. n

1 xn

Claim 5.7. n15

xn

2
n
2n3
2n

Now, prove induction n first summand Equation 9 n8 . Denote
first term wln . Note wln+1 = (1 xn+1 )2 + xn+1 wln . Assuming wln n8 ,
8
using two claims above, easy prove wln+1 n+1
n > 14. (the
reader verify holds n 14.)
Next, prove (again induction n) second expression smaller n1 .
Q
Q
1
assume ni=1 xi n1 prove n+1
i=1 xi n+1 (using Claim 5.7 ) :
n+1

i=1

xi = xn+1

n


xi xn+1

i=1

2n 1 1
2n 1 1
1
1
1

<
+
=
n
2n + 2 n
2n + 2 n 2n(n + 1)
n+1

Thus, expected welfare loss smaller n8 + n1 = n9
statement profit loss derived result welfare
loss (again, reducing profit optimization welfare optimization). Nevertheless, direct
proof easy given claims: thresholds x above, profit
21. expected welfare given by: xn

x
2

+ (1 xn )

1+x
.
2
n
12
n+1

maximum
achieved

(first order
1
n
1 n n1 ( n1 1) ( n+1

1

maximal welfare unbounded communication). easy see 1 n1 n converges logn n
1
log n
welfare loss converges logn n . indeed, 1 n1 n = 1e n logn n (since 1ex x
small xs).
conditions) with: x = n

1
n1

. welfare loss thus:

258

fiAuctions Severely Bounded Communication

B


0
1

0

1

A, 0
A, 13

B, 14
B, 34

Figure 3: (h1 ) sequential game (when bids first) attains higher expected welfare
simultaneous mechanism communication requirement (2 bits).
outcome achieved Bayesian-Nash equilibrium.

loss bounded
smaller

Pn Qn
i=1


x
j=i+1 j (1 xi ) (1 xi ) proved

8 22
n.

6. Sequential Auctions
sequential mechanisms, bidders split bids smaller messages send
alternating order. section, show sequential mechanisms achieve
better results. However, additional gain (in amount communication)
linear factor number bidders.
sequential mechanism mechanism bidder may send several separate
messages, order (not necessarily round-robin fashion). stage,
bidder knows messages bidders sent far. messages
sent, mechanism determines allocation payments. study general
framework auctioneer adaptively determine order messages
sizes according message history. auctioneer use randomization
decisions. measure communication volume mechanism number
bits actually transmitted.
Definition 16. communication requirement mechanism maximal amount
bits may transmitted bidders mechanism.
strategy bidder sequential mechanism threshold strategy stage
game bidder determines message sends comparing valuation
threshold values x1 , ...xi (where bidder + 1 possible bids stage i).
Example 2. following sequential mechanism communication requirement 2
(see Figure 3 ): Alice sends one bit mechanism first. Bob, knowing Alices bid,
sends one bit. Alice bids 0: Bob wins bids 1 pays 14 ; bids zero Alice
wins pays zero. Alice bids 1: Bob wins bids 1, pays 34 ;
bids zero, Alice wins again, pays 13 .
easy see mechanism Bayesian-Nash equilibrium23 achieves
expected welfare 0.653. saw efficient simultaneous mechanism

22. priority games based thresholds
, bidder wins item, pays yi . Thus, maximal
profit loss bidder wins 1 yi .
23. following strategies Bayesian-Nash equilibrium: Alice uses threshold 12 , Bob uses
threshold 41 Alice bids 0 34 Alice bids 1.

259

fiBlumrosen, Nisan & Segal

communication requirement 2 bits 0.648 (see Section 1). conclude sequential
mechanisms gain efficiency simultaneous mechanisms.
Note throughout paper searched optimal mechanisms among
mechanisms Bayesian-Nash equilibria, managed implement optimum
dominant strategy. sequential mechanisms less likely find dominant-strategy
implementations, thus example uses Bayesian-Nash implementation. result below, however, assume particular equilibrium concept sequential
mechanisms.
significant extra gain sequential mechanisms simultaneous mechanisms? following theorem states every sequential mechanism communication
requirement exists simultaneous mechanism achieves least
welfare communication requirement nm (where n number bidders)24 .
Note general (e.g., Kushilevitz & Nisan, 1997), multi-round protocols reduce
communication exponential factor. observe gain sequential
mechanism actually even smaller. many environments, messages sent centralized authority (auctioneer); therefore, extra bits communication required
inform bidders previous messages bidders. following theorem
holds order transmission size sub-messages, even values
adaptively determined according previous messages.
goal section show gain sequential auctions, compared
simultaneous auctions, mild. offer comprehensive analysis case,
present welfare-maximizing revenue-maximizing auctions. Several recent papers
studied different aspects sequential auctions similar constraints. Sandholm
Gilpin (2006) analyzed sequential auctions designed sequences take-it-or-leave-it offers.
paper Kress Boutilier (2004) studied sequential single-item auctions discrete
price increment, information used subsequent stages. work Parkes
(2006) studied information elicitation simultaneous sequential auctions
values uncertain.
First, observe assume welfare-maximizing strategies
bidders threshold strategies. Again, show message chosen bidder
i, welfare linear function vi . show use backward-induction
argument: last message, bidders clearly use thresholds. Therefore, previous
stages welfare (as function vi fixing strategies bidders) linear
combination linear functions linear function. maximum linear
function piecewise linear function thresholds crossing points.
Theorem 6.1. Let h n-bidder sequential mechanism communication requirement m. Then, exists simultaneous mechanism g achieves, dominant
strategies, least expected welfare h, communication requirement smaller
nm.
Proof. Consider n-bidder mechanism h Bayesian-Nash equilibrium,
communication requirement (for simplicity, assume n divides m, i.e., bidder sends
24. Note sequential mechanisms bidders must informed bits bidders sent
(we take account analysis), total gain communication mild.

260

fiAuctions Severely Bounded Communication


n

bits). exists profile = (s1 , ..., sn ) threshold strategies achieves
optimal welfare h. First, give upper bound total number thresholds
bidder uses game. bidder i, let 1i , ..., ki (positive) sizes ki
messages sends h. Let ji (1 j ki ) number bits sent
bidders (including i), bidder sends jth message. choosing message

size ji , bidder uses 2j 1 thresholds. stage, every bidder use
different set thresholds, every
history game. Thus, sending jth
possible

ji
j
message use 2
2 1 different thresholds. Summing up, bidder uses

Pki
(i) = j=1 2 j 2 j 1 thresholds. Now, assume, w.l.o.g., bidders
numbered according order send last messages (i.e., k11 > k22 > ... > knn ).
Recall total number
of1bits sent
bidders m. sending last message,
m1k
k
1
1
bidder 1 thus uses 2
2
1 < 2m different thresholds. Since messages
2

m12k

2
non-zero size, bidder 2 2
2 k2 1 < 2m1 different thresholds
last stage. Similarly, every bidder use 2mi+1 thresholds last
message. therefore, before-last message bidder uses 2mi1 different
thresholds (the worst case occurs one bidder sends one bit bidder 2 last
messages). follows maximal number different thresholds bidder is:
(i) =

ki
X




2j 2j 1

2mi+1 + 2mi1 +

<




2j 2j 1

j=1

j=1

< 2mi+1 + 2mi1 +

kX
2

mi2
X

2j

<

2mi+1 + 2mi1 + 2mi1

<

2mi+2

j=1

Now, let g simultaneous mechanisms bidder simply informs
mechanism thresholds uses h valuation lies. Clearly, every
set valuations bidders, allocation g h identical. Due inequality
above, + 2 bits suffice bidder express P
number. conclude
number bits sent bidders g smaller than: ni=1 (m + 2) = nm n(n3)
.
2
Finally, mention set allocation scheme payment scheme
g threshold-strategies based thresholds equilibrium
expected welfare decrease. shown Section 3, turn mechanism
monotone allocating item deterministically bidder highest expected
value, combination bids. dominant-strategy equilibrium follows.
analysis holds order sizes bidder messages, even
depend history messages, since counting number thresholds still
done way.

7. Future Work
paper concerns single-item auctions severely limited ability elicit
information bidders: possible bids available player although
player may continuum types. give comprehensive analysis
261

fiBlumrosen, Nisan & Segal

auctions, present welfare- revenue-maximizing mechanisms restrictions.
asymptotically analyze losses optimal mechanisms compared auctions
unrestricted communication, compare auctions bidders
messages sent sequentially.
leave several questions open. obvious problem exact characterization
optimal mechanisms arbitrary number players arbitrary number
possible bids. paper fully characterized optimal 2-bidder k-bid auctions
optimal n-bidder 2-bid auctions, presented asymptotically optimal results
general case n players k bids. Also, future work may provide asymptotic analysis
welfare- revenue loss function k n (we provided separate
asymptotic analysis variables).
additional interesting question regarding gain allocating bits communication non-uniformly among agents. simple domains (like 2-bidder simultaneous auctions) uniform distribution communication seems best option,
would unclear, probably untrue, general settings. addition, seems
concepts methods presented work extend general frameworks,
general single-parameter mechanism-design settings mechanism design interdependent values (some extensions given recent work Blumrosen & Feldman,
2006).
Finally, work presented partial study sequential auctions communication
restrictions. kind auctions captures many reasonable real-life settings, seems
analytically challenging. present characterization optimal sequential mechanisms paper, direct comparison simultaneous sequential
mechanisms communication requirement. Future work may compare
prior-aware sequential mechanisms detail-free sequential mechanisms (a similar comparison simultaneous mechanisms showed detail-free mechanism achieve
trivial results). Another possible extension would take integrated approach
study settings partially-known priors.
Acknowledgment. thank Ron Lavi, Daniel Lehmann, Ahuva Mualem Motty
Perry helpful discussions. thank several anonymous referees valuable remarks, suggestions insights. first two authors supported grants
Israeli Academy Sciences. third author supported National Science
Foundation.

Appendix A. Missing proofs
section present formal proofs results given body
paper.

262

fiAuctions Severely Bounded Communication

A.1 Optimality Threshold Strategies
Proof Claim 3.2 Theorem 3.1:
Proof. Given vector strategies achieve optimal welfare g (i.e.,
maxsek k w(g, se) ), show every player modify si threshold
i=1

strategy, welfare decrease.
Assume si threshold strategy. Therefore, must , , [a, b], < <
si () = si () = si () 6= (where bid player i).
show strategy vector identical , except every si () = m,
w(g, s) w(g, ).
Denote probability players except bids bi P r(bi ). Thus, expected
welfare game g given bidder valuation vi bids
players use strategies si is:


X
X

P r(bi ) ai (m, bi ) vi +
aj (m, bi ) E(vj sj (vj ) = bj )
bi

j6=i

Note expected welfare linear function vi , denote h(m) vi +
t(m) (the constants h(m) t(m) depend bid m).
know achieve optimal welfare g si () = m. Therefore,
bid l si () = l, expected welfare increase, i.e.:
l 6=

h(m) + t(m) h(l) + t(l)

(10)

h(m) + t(m) h(l) + t(l)

(11)

Similarly, si () = m:
l 6=

convex combination , due Equations 10 11:
l 6= h(m) + t(m) h(l) + t(l)
Thus, expected welfare player i, given vi = , maximal bids m. Therefore, modifying si si () = total expected welfare decrease.
repeat process si becomes threshold strategy.25
A.2 Optimal Mechanisms Use Possible Bids
opt
opt
Lemma A.1. w2,(k,k)
> w2,(k1,k)
every k > 1.

Proof. Let g G2,(k1,k) deterministic, monotone mechanism achieves optimal
welfare threshold strategies based vectors (x, y). row g form
[A, ..., A, B, ..., B], let li {0, ..., k} first index row B wins.
modify g ge G2,(k,k) adding missing row, change threshold strategy x
x
e <k+1 , welfare strictly improves. assume, w.l.o.g., thresholds
unique (i.e., 0 < x1 < ... < xk1 < 1, 0 < y1 < ... < 1).
25. See analysis similar problems, e.g., Athey (2001).

263

fiBlumrosen, Nisan & Segal

Case 1. row [B, ..., B] games matrix.
0

E

(v |0v )

0

Let x1 = vB B 2 B 1 , let x
e = (0, x1 , x1 , x2 , ..., xk2 , 1). create new
game ge adding line [B, ..., B] first line. easy see allocation
0
g ge identical rows except new one. vA [0, x1 ] vB [0, y1 ]
ge allocates item B g allocated item A. distribution functions
0
always positive, hence occur positive probability. Since E(vA |vA [0, x1 ]) <
0
x1 < EvB (vB |0 vB y1 ), expected welfare strictly increased. higher bids
bidder B, allocation first row clearly efficient now, therefore welfare
loss incurred.
Case 2. row [B, ..., B] appear gs game matrix.
Due monotonicity, g must two rows + 1 two columns j j + 1
allocate item B bids (i, j), (i, j + 1)
bids (i + 1, j), (i + 1, j + 1). create mechanism ge adding row i0 identical
row + 1 except B wins index j + 1. new threshold constructed follows:
E(vB |yj vB yj+1 ) < xi+1 :
0
0
Let xi+1 = E(vB |yj vB yj+1 ), let x
e = (0, x1 , ..., xi , xi , xi+1 , ..., 1). previous
cases, welfare entries hasnt changed, except strictly positive improvement
(i0 , j) entry.
E(vB |yj vB yj+1 ) xi+1 :
0
0
Let xi = E(vB |yj+1 vB yj+2 ) let x
e = (0, x1 , ..., xi , xi , xi+1 , ..., 1). show
0
since g efficient xi+1 < xi < xi+2 : First, E(vB |yj+1 vB yj+2 ) > E(vB |yj vB
yj+1 ) xi+1 ; Also, since wins bids (i + 1, j + 1), E(vB |yj+1 vB
yj+2 ) E(vA |xi+1 vA xi+2 ) < xi+2 . follows expected welfare strictly
increased entry (i0 , j + 1), decreased entries.
A.3 Optimal Symmetric 1-bit Mechanisms
Following optimal 1-bit 2-bidder mechanisms assuming independent uniform distribution values. socially-efficient symmetric 1-bit mechanism achieves expected
welfare 0.625 compared 0.648 achieved asymmetric 1-bit mechanism
2/3 achieved unrestricted communication. Similarly, revenue-maximizing
symmetric 1-bit mechanism achieves expected profit 0.385 compared 0.39
1-bit symmetric mechanisms 5/12 = 0.417 unrestricted communication (secondprice auction reserve price).
following mechanism achieves optimal welfare among symmetric 1-bit
mechanisms:
0
1

0
w.p. 12 wins, pays 0
w.p. 12 B wins, pays 0
wins pays 14

1
B wins pays
w.p.
w.p.

1
2
1
2

1
4

wins, pays 12
B wins, pays 12

Proving social efficiency mechanism done following idea: First
note symmetric, efficient mechanism clearly allocate item player
264

fiAuctions Severely Bounded Communication

bids 1 player bids 0, allocate equal probabilities 12
bids equal. threshold strategies (x, y) expected welfare is:


w(x,
y) = x 12 x2 + 12 y2 + x (1 y) (1+y)
+ (1 x) (1+x)
+ (1 x) (1 y)
2
2

1
2



(1+x)
2a

+

1
2



(1+y)
2

Maximum achieved (x, y) = ( 12 , 12 ).
mechanism revenue-maximizing mechanism:
0
1

0
allocation
wins, pays 13

1
B wins pays 13
w.p. 12 wins, pays 13
w.p. 12 B wins, pays 13

idea behind optimality mechanism 1-bit symmetric
mechanisms: profit-maximizing symmetric mechanism player bids 0
bids 1, latter wins pays x. players bid 1, pay x equal
probabilities. easy see ex-post IR assumption, x = x. expected
profit thus: r(x) = x(1 x)x + (1 x)xx + (1 x)(1 x)( 21 x + 12 x). Maximum achieved
(x [0, 1]) x = 13 .

References
Ajtai, M., Megiddo, N., & Waarts, O. (2001). Improved algorithms analysis secretary
problems generalizations. SIAM Journal Discrete Mathematics, 14 (1), 127.
Athey, S. (2001). Single crossing properties existence pure strategy equilibria
games incomplete information. Econometrica, 69 (4), 86189.
Bar-Yossef, Z., Hildrum, K., & Wu, F. (2002). Incentive-compatible online auctions digital goods. 13th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium Discrete Algorithms (SODA),
pp. 964970.
Bergemann, D., & Pesendorfer, M. (2001). Information structures optimal auctions. Tech.
rep. 2991, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
Blumrosen, L., & Feldman, M. (2006). Implementation bounded action space.
Proceedings 7th ACM conference Electronic commerce, pp. 6271.
Cramton, P., Shoham, Y., & Steinberg, R. (2006). Combinatorial Auctions. MIT Press.
David, E., Rogers, A., Schiff, J., Kraus, S., & Jennings, N. (2005). Optimal design
English auctions discrete bid levels. Sixth ACM Conference Electronic
Commerce, pp. 98107.
Feigenbaum, J., Papadimitriou, C. H., & Shenker, S. (2001). Sharing cost muliticast
transmissions. Journal Computer System Sciences., 63, 2141.
Gilbert, J. P., & Mosteller, F. (1966). Recognizing maximum sequence. Journal
American Statistical Association, 61, 3573.
Goldberg, A. V., Hartline, J. D., & Wright, A. (2001). Competitive auctions digital
goods. Symposium Discrete Algorithms, pp. 735744.
265

fiBlumrosen, Nisan & Segal

Harstad, R. M., & Rothkopf, M. H. (1994). role discrete bid levels oral auctions.
European Journal Operations Research, 4, 572581.
Kress, A., & Boutilier, C. (2004). study limited precision, incremental elicitation
auctions. 3rd international joint conference autonomous agents multiagent systems.
Kushilevitz, E., & Nisan, N. (1997). Communication Complexity. Cambridge University
Press.
Lavi, R., & Nisan, N. (2004). Competitive analysis incentive compatible on-line auctions.
Theoretical Computer Science., 310 (1), 159180.
McAfee, P. (2002). Coarse matching. Econometrica, 70 (5), 20252034.
Mookherjee, D., & Reichelstein, S. (1992). Dominant strategy implementation Bayesian
incentive compatible allocation rules. Journal Economic Theory, 56 (2), 378399.
Myerson, R. B. (1981). Optimal auction design. Mathematics Operations Research, 6 (1),
5873.
Nisan, N., & Segal, I. (2006). communication requirements efficient allocations
supporting prices. Journal Economic Theory, 129 (1), 192224.
Parkes, D. C. (2005). Auction design costly preference elicitation. Annals Mathematics Artificial Intelligence, 44 (3), 269302.
Parkes, D. C. (2006). Iterative combinatorial auctions. Cramton, P., Shoham, Y., &
Steinberg, R. (Eds.), Combinatorial Auctions, chap. 2. MIT Press.
Riley, J. G., & Samuelson, W. F. (1981). Optimal auctions. American Economic Review,
71 (3), 381392.
Roth, A. E., & Ockenfels, A. (2002). Late-minute bidding rules ending secondprice auctions: Evidence eBay Amazon Internet. American Economic
Review, 92 (4), 10931103.
Rothkopf, M. H., Teisberg, T. J., & Kahn, E. P. (1990). Vickrey auctions rare?.
Journal Political Economy, 98 (1), 94109.
Sandholm, T., & Gilpin, A. (2006). Sequences take-it-or-leave-it offers: Near-optimal
auctions without full valuation revelation. Fifth International Joint Conference
Autonomous Agents Multiagent Systems, pp. 11271134.
Segal, I. (2003). Optimal pricing mechanisms unknown demand. American Economic
Review, 93 (3), 509529.
Vickrey, W. (1961). Counterspeculation, auctions competitive sealed tenders. Journal
Finance, 16, 837.
Wilson, R. (1989). Efficient competitive rationing. Econometrica, 57, 140.

266


