Journal Artificial Intelligence Research 43 (2012) 621-659

Submitted 11/11; published 04/12

Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management
Urban Road Traffic Networks
Matteo Vasirani
Sascha Ossowski

matteo.vasirani@urjc.es
sascha.ossowski@urjc.es

Centre Intelligent Information Technology
University Rey Juan Carlos
C/ Tulipan s/n
Madrid, 28933, Spain

Abstract
Traffic congestion urban road networks costly problem affects major
cities developed countries. tackle problem, possible (i) act supply
side, increasing number roads lanes network, (ii) reduce demand, restricting access urban areas specific hours specific vehicles, (iii) improve
efficiency existing network, means widespread use so-called Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITS). line recent advances smart transportation
management infrastructures, turned promising field application
artificial intelligence techniques. particular, multiagent systems seem ideal
candidates design implementation ITS. fact, drivers naturally
modelled autonomous agents interact transportation management infrastructure, thereby generating large-scale, open, agent-based system. regulate
system maintain smooth efficient flow traffic, decentralised mechanisms
management transportation infrastructure needed.
article propose distributed, market-inspired, mechanism management future urban road network, intelligent autonomous vehicles, operated
software agents behalf human owners, interact infrastructure order
travel safely efficiently road network. Building reservationbased intersection control model proposed Dresner Stone, consider two different
scenarios: one single intersection one network intersections.
former, analyse performance novel policy based combinatorial auctions
allocation reservations. latter, analyse impact traffic assignment strategy inspired competitive markets drivers route choices. Finally
propose adaptive management mechanism integrates auction-based traffic
control policy competitive traffic assignment strategy.

1. Introduction
Removing human driver control loop use autonomous vehicles integrated intelligent road infrastructure considered ultimate,
long-term goal set systems technologies grouped name Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITS). Autonomous vehicles already reality. instance,
three DARPA Grand Challenges 1 held far. teams participating
latest event, DARPA Urban Challenge, competed build best autonomous vehi1. http://archive.darpa.mil/grandchallenge/
c
!2012
AI Access Foundation. rights reserved.

fiVasirani & Ossowski

cles, capable driving traffic, performing complex manoeuvres merging, passing,
parking negotiating intersections. results shown first time
autonomous vehicles successfully interact manned unmanned vehicular
traffic urban environment. Several car-makers expect technology affordable
(and less obtrusive) decade2 . Another initiative fosters vision Connected Vehicle 3 , promotes research development technologies link road
vehicles directly physical surroundings, i.e., vehicle-to-infrastructure wireless
communications. advantages integration span improved road safety
efficient operational use transportation network. instance, vehicles
exchange critical safety information infrastructure, recognise high-risk
situations advance therefore alert drivers. Furthermore, traffic signal systems
communicate signal phase timing information vehicles enhance use
transportation network.
regard, authors recently paid attention potential tighter
integration autonomous vehicles road infrastructure future urban traffic management. reservation-based control system (Dresner & Stone, 2008), intersection
regulated software agent, called intersection manager agent, assigns reservations space time autonomous vehicle intending cross intersection.
vehicle operated another software agent, called driver agent. vehicle
approaching intersection, driver requests intersection manager reserve
necessary space-time slots safely cross intersection. intersection manager,
provided data vehicle ID, vehicle size, arrival time, arrival speed, type turn,
etc., simulates vehicles trajectory inside intersection informs driver whether
request conflict already confirmed reservations. conflict
exist, driver stores reservation details tries meet them; otherwise may try
later time. authors show simulations situations balanced
traffic, vehicles autonomous, delays intersection drastically reduced
compared traditional traffic lights.
article explore different lines research artificial intelligence agent
technology improve effectiveness applicability Dresner Stones
approach, assuming vehicles autonomous capable interacting
regulating traffic infrastructure. extend reservation-based model intersection
control two different levels.
1.1 Single Intersection
single intersection, objective elaborate new policy allocation
reservations vehicles takes account drivers different attitudes regarding
travel times. Instead granting disputed resources (intersection space time)
first agent requests them, intend allocate agents value
most, maintaining adequate level efficiency fairness system.
main contribution regard definition auction-based allocation policy
2. See example Alan Taub, General Motors Vice President Global R&D, 18th World Congress
Intelligent Transport Systems, October 17th, 2011.
3. http://www.its.dot.gov/connected vehicle/connected vehicle.htm

622

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

assigning reservations. policy models incoming requests bids intersections
available space-time slots tries maximise overall value accepted bids. Due
combinatorial nature auction restrictions scenario (mainly realtime execution safety), define specific auction protocol, adapt algorithm
winner determination purposes, evaluate behaviour approach.
1.2 Network Intersections.
extend Dresner Stones approach network intersections, focus
problem traffic assignment, conceived distributed choice problem intersection
managers try affect decision making driver agents. particular, use markets
mediators distributed choice allocation problem (Gerding, McBurney, &
Yao, 2010). contribution attainment objective twofold. First,
build computational market drivers must acquire right pass
intersections urban road network, implementing intersection managers
competitive suppliers reservations selfishly adapt prices match actual
demand. Second, combine competitive strategy traffic assignment
auction-based control policy intersection level adaptive, market-inspired,
mechanism traffic management reservation-based intersections.
article structured follows. Section 2 provides overview use artificial
intelligence agent technology field ITS. Section 3 briefly review key
elements reservation-based intersection control model work sets from.
Section 4 present policy allocation reservations single intersection,
inspired combinatorial auction theory. Section 5 extend reservation-based
model network intersections. Finally, conclude Section 6.

2. Related Work
achieve goals pursued vision increasing need understand,
model, govern systems individual (micro) societal (macro)
level. Transportation systems may contain thousands autonomous entities need
governed, raises significant technical problems concerning efficiency
scalability. inherent distribution traffic management control problems,
high degree complexity, fact actors traffic transportation systems
(driver, pedestrians, infrastructure managers, etc.) fit concept autonomous agent
well, allow modelling terms agents interact achieve
goals, selfishly well cooperatively. Therefore, traffic transportation scenarios
extraordinarily appealing multiagent technology (Bazzan & Klugl, 2008). section,
outline key dimensions briefly review relevant literature use
artificial intelligence multiagent techniques field.
2.1 Traffic Control Traffic Assignment
Traffic control refers regulation access disputed road transport resource.
Traffic control systems manage traffic along arterial roadways, employing traffic detectors,
traffic signals, various means communicating information drivers. Freeway control
623

fiVasirani & Ossowski

systems manage traffic along highways, employing traffic surveillance systems, traffic control
measures freeway entrance ramps (ramp metering), lane management.
Traffic control intersections, based traffic lights, major control measure
urban road networks. type control typically applies off-line optimisation basis
historical data. TRANSYT (Robertson, 1969) well-known frequently applied
signal control strategy, cannot adapt dynamically changing demand patterns.
control techniques, SCOOT (Hunt, Robertson, Bretherton, & Winton, 1981),
use real-time traffic volume rather historical data run optimisation algorithms
compute optimal signal plan.
Traffic assignment refers problem distribution traffic network, considering demands several locations, capacity network. general,
demand may change non-predictable way, due changing environmental conditions,
exceptional events, accidents. This, turn, leads under-utilisation overall network capacity, whereby links heavily congested capacity reserves available
alternative routes. address problem, different traffic management techniques, involving information broadcast well control optimisation, employed.
example, route guidance driver information systems (RGDIS) may employed improve network efficiency via direct indirect recommendation alternative routes (Papageorgiou, Diakaki, Dinopoulou, Kotsialos, & Wang, 2003). communication devices
may consulted potential road user make rational decision regarding whether
carry (or postpone) intended trip, choice transport mode (car, bus,
underground, etc.), departure time selection route choice.
Traffic control assignment different focuses therefore combined
single management policy takes explicitly account mutual interactions
signal control policies user route choices (Meneguzzer, 1997).
2.2 Isolated Coordinated Traffic Control
traffic control strategies use control devices (e.g., traffic lights, variable message signs,
ramp meters) surveillance devices (e.g., loop detectors, cameras) manage physical
traffic network. isolated control, small portion network (e.g. single
intersection) modelled, techniques control theory employed determine
signal cycles minimise vehicles total delay. instance, da Silva et al. proposed
reinforcement learning system traffic lights copes dynamism
environment incrementally building new models environmental state transitions
rewards (da Silva, Basso, Bazzan, & Engel, 2006). traffic pattern changes,
additional model created new traffic signal plan learned. creation new
models controlled continuous evaluation prediction errors generated
partial model.
coordinated control, settings several control devices adapted other,
achieve smooth traffic flow network level (i.e., green waves) rather
single intersection. allowing individual devices coordinate actions
based information receive sensors other, coherent traffic
control plans often generated faster accurately compared human traffic
operator (van Katwijk, Schutter, & Hellendoorn, 2009). instance, distributed constraint
624

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

optimisation (DCOP) techniques recently applied coordination control
devices (Junges & Bazzan, 2008). traffic signal agent assigned one several
variables DCOP, inter-dependencies conflicts (e.g., two neighbouring
intersections giving preference different directions traffic.). mediator agent
charge resolving conflicts occur, recommending values variables
associated agents involved mediation.
2.3 Time Perspective
time perspective refers stage decision-making process
application takes place. Operational decision-making refers short term issues,
controlling traffic intersection. Tactical decision-making deals medium-term
issues, anticipating congestion diverting traffic different routes influencing
demand patterns. Finally, strategic decision-making typically involves long-term decisions,
e.g. planning construction new roads, highways parking hubs.
Many AI-based partially automate operational part road traffic control tasks.
Tactical strategic decision-making still mainly human activity (e.g., carried
city planners). recent decision-support systems address tactical questions
well. InT RY (Hernandez, Ossowski, & Garca-Serrano, 2002), instance, multiagent
system aimed assisting operators traffic control centre manage urban motorway
network. system capable engaging dialogues operators, e.g. diagnose
causes detected traffic problems, construct coherent sets driver information
messages, simulate expected effects control plans.
2.4 Information Drivers
Cooperative systems improve dynamic routing traffic management (Adler, Satapathy, Manikonda, Bowles, & Blue, 2005), using information services aimed giving advice
drivers efficiently assigning traffic among network. difficult problem collective route choice performed selfish agents often leads equilibrium strategies
far social welfare optima (Roughgarden, 2003). Providing information congestion links sharing partial views vehicle choices, context-aware routing (Zutt,
van Gemund, de Weerdt, & Witteveen, 2010), may improve systems efficiency.
2.5 Domain Knowledge
Domain topological knowledge exploited structure architecture
reasoning models ITS. instance, Choy et al. propose cooperative, hierarchical, multiagent system real-time traffic signal control (Choy, Srinivasan, & Cheu,
2003). control problem divided various sub-problems, handled
intelligent agent applies fuzzy neural decision-making. multiagent system
hierarchical, since decisions made lower-level agents mediated respective
higher-level agents. InT RY system (Hernandez et al., 2002) conceives traffic
dynamics terms so-called problem areas, defined based expertise
traffic engineers. problem area controlled separate traffic control (software)
agent. Knowledge modelling reasoning techniques applied integrate local control
625

fiVasirani & Ossowski

strategies (proposed different traffic control agents) coherent global plan
whole traffic network.
2.6 Learning Adaptation
often rely learning techniques adapt changing unknown traffic conditions.
instance, traffic light agents may use reinforcement learning minimise overall
waiting time vehicles (Steingrover, Schouten, Peelen, Nijhuis, & Bakker, 2005; Wiering,
2000). control objective global, although actions local agents. state
learning task represented aggregation waiting times individual vehicles
intersection. Traffic light agents learn value function estimates expected
waiting times vehicles given different settings traffic lights.
Several authors focus self-organising self-adapting mechanisms traffic control (Gershenson, 2005; Lammer & Helbing, 2008), traffic lights self-organise
direct communication them. local interactions neighbouring traffic lights lead emergent coordination patterns green waves. way,
efficient, decentralised traffic light control achieved, combination two rules, one
aims optimising flow one aims stabilising it. RY SA2
system (Hernandez et al., 2002), traffic agents use mechanism called structural cooperation (Ossowski & Garca-Serrano, 1999) locally coordinate signal plan proposals
without need rely dedicated domain (coordination) knowledge.
2.7 Market-Based Coordination
complex system, traffic well suited application market-based coordination mechanisms different levels. mechanisms replicate functioning real
markets (i.e., auctions, bargaining, etc.) order coordinate activities goals
pursued set agents. agents regulate infrastructure built
act team, i.e., may share global objective function represents system
designers preferences possible solutions, occurs multi-robot domains (Dias,
Zlot, Kalra, & Stentz, 2006). line perspective, Vasirani Ossowski (2009b)
proposed market-based policy traffic assignment. authors put forward cooperative learning model coordinate prices several intersections. experimental
results showed that, general, increase profit raised team intersections
aligned reduced average travel times. limitation work number interactions environment required order price vector maximises
overall profit learned.
extend focus include selfish driver agents interaction
infrastructure agents, non-cooperative scenario arises. instance, auction-based
policy intersection control proposed work Schepperle Bohm (2007).
work, intersection controlled intelligent agent starts auction earliest
time slot among vehicles approaching intersection lane. authors
assume agent controls intersection detect approaching vehicle
another vehicle front it. case, former allowed participate
auction (i.e., bids processed), ensure vehicles
physical impediments cross intersection allowed participate auction.
626

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

Furthermore, since non-combinatorial auction run allocate earliest time-slot,
one bidder (i.e., driver) entitled get specific time-slot, lead inefficiencies
assignments.
field transport economics studies allocation resources used move
road users place place (Small & Verhoef, 2007). However, follows static
analytical approach requires extensive knowledge supply demand functions.
information often hard obtain extract, usually findings field
hard transfer directly ITS.
2.8 Discussion
work, mainly focus operational time perspective, since aim
manage advanced traffic infrastructure regulates route choices autonomous
vehicles, tactical strategic decisions left human users. order make
proposed mechanisms broadly adoptable, minimise domain knowledge necessary
set models. software agents reside traffic management
infrastructure need aware remaining infrastructure agents, require
expert knowledge related underlying traffic system. focus local adaptation
mechanisms, rather learning techniques, enforce emergent coordination among
software agents reside traffic management infrastructure. Furthermore,
put forward market-based coordination framework involves infrastructure
drivers. infrastructure agents coordinate actions indirect way
competitive market participants aim match supply demand. driver
agents participate allocation road network capacity auction-based
mechanism regulates assignment right cross intersection. Finally,
recognise importance providing information drivers order influence
decision making. particular, assume existence propagation mechanisms,
market price information available drivers, thus potentially influencing
collective behaviour4 .

3. Reservation-Based Intersection Control
applications AI techniques multiagent technology traffic domains
detailed previous section conceive lies infrastructure components (traffic lights, message signs, sensors, etc.), vehicles usually treated
particles traffic flow control policy cannot individually address. Nevertheless,
continuous advances software hardware technologies make tighter integration
vehicles infrastructure possible. Even today, vehicles equipped
features cruise control (Ioannou & Chien, 1993) autonomous steering (Krogh
& Thorpe, 1986). Small-scale systems autonomous guided vehicles (AGV) already exist,
example factory transport systems. trend continues, one day fully autonomous
vehicles populate road networks. case, given system comprise
variable (and possibly huge) number vehicles, open infrastructure needed control
4. Setting price index boards technically feasible already today: instance, NYSE indexes
approximately 8500 stocks, whose price variations spread worldwide almost immediately.

627

fiVasirani & Ossowski

Driver agent
(2)
Send REQUEST

Intersection manager

Reservation distance
lter

(5)

> reservation
distance di ?

Calculate
distance d(r)



Get driver
agent's ID

(3)

(1)

yes
Send
REJECTION

(6)

(4)


reservation ?



yes

(11)

(10)

Send
REJECTION

Update di

Remove
agent's
reservation

min(di,d(r))

yes

(9)

(7)

(8)
Simulate
trajectory


conicts ?


(13)

(12)

Send
CONFIRMATION

Update di

Figure 1: Reservation-based protocol FCFS policy
schedule transit AGVs. fact, nowadays centralised AGV control systems know
number vehicles, origins destinations, route planning takes
place. case urban road traffic scenario, approach certainly unfeasible.
section present details reservation-based system intersection
control (Dresner & Stone, 2008) relevant work5 . particular outline
policy executed intersection managers process reservations requests (Section 3.1)
analyse impact distance reservation sent performance
control mechanism (Section 3.2).
3.1 Protocol
reservation-based control system proposed Dresner Stone assumes existence
two different kinds software agents: intersection manager agents driver agents.
intersection manager agent controls space intersection schedules crossing
vehicle. driver agent entity autonomously operates vehicle (in
following use terms intersection manager driver short, refer
software agents control intersection vehicle respectively). protocol,
using first-come-first-served policy (FCFS), summarised Figure 1. driver,
5. remark work engineered basic aspects reservation-based system.
consider advanced features, acceleration within intersections, safety buffers edge
tiles. basic functioning reservation-based intersection assume work
every experimental scenario compare. way fair comparison different policies
allocation reservations guaranteed.

628

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

(request reservation
:sender
:receiver
:content(

D-3548
IM-05629
:arrival time
:arrival speed
:lane
:type turn

08:03:15
23km/h
2
LEFT

)
)
Figure 2: Example REQUEST message
approaching intersection, contacts intersection manager sending REQUEST
message (1). message contains vehicles ID, arrival time, arrival speed,
lane occupied vehicle road segment approaches intersection
intended type turn (see Figure 2 example REQUEST message). intersection
manager calculates distance d(r) driver sending reservation request
r (2). distance greater maximum reservation distance di lane
driver occupying (3), request rejected without processing (4). Otherwise,
intersection manager proceeds evaluate whether accommodated not.
First, drivers ID parsed (5), driver already prior reservation (6),
reservation removed (7). Then, information contained REQUEST message,
intersection manager simulates vehicle trajectory, calculating space needed
vehicle time order check potential conflicts (8). (9),
intersection manager updates maximum reservation distance di (10) replies
REJECTION message (11). Otherwise, maximum reservation distance di updated
infinite (12) intersection manager replies CONFIRMATION message (13),
implies drivers request accepted.
FCFS policy implies two drivers send requests require spacetime slots inside intersection, driver sends request first obtain
reservation. extreme cases policy clearly inefficient. Consider case set
n vehicles, v1 , v2 , . . . , vn , v1 request conflicts every vehicle,
v2 , . . . , vn conflicts one another. v1 sends request first,
granted vehicles requests rejected. hand, sends
request last, n 1 vehicles requests confirmed, whilst v1
wait. Nevertheless, FCFS advantage simple policy,
needs minimum amount information necessary implement reservation-based
intersection control.
3.2 Reservation Distance
protocol detailed would prone deadlock situations, make use
reservation distance filter. Consider two vehicles, B, moving front
B (see Figure 3). Suppose B cannot safely overtake A. B send request
629

fiVasirani & Ossowski

B sends request
rst gets
reservation

B

A's request
rejected, thus
must stop
intersection


Given cannot
cross, B must
stop
intersection

Figure 3: Potential deadlock situation.

space-time slots inside intersection, first request intersection
manager receives accepted, second one rejected. vehicle B,
behind vehicle A, obtains reservation, result vehicle able
cross hold confirmed reservation. turn prevents vehicle B
making use reservation. vehicle B always sends request first, deadlock
situation arises, vehicle physically blocking vehicle B, vehicle B blocking vehicle
getting disputed reservation.
avoid occurrence deadlock situations, Dresner Stone proposed
use reservation distance heuristic criterion filtering reservation requests
could generate deadlock situations. Since drivers communicate time
plan arrive intersection, well speed get
(quantities drivers incentive misrepresent), possible
approximate vehicles distance intersection, given reservation request
vehicle. heuristic approximation, called reservation distance d(r), calculated
d(r) = va (ta t), va proposed arrival speed vehicle, ta proposed
arrival time vehicle, current time.
approximation assumes vehicle maintaining constant speed.
reservation processing policy uses follows. lane i, policy variable di ,
initialised infinity, represents maximum distance driver send
reservation request. reservation request r lane i, policy computes
reservation distance, d(r). d(r) > di , r rejected. If, hand, d(r) di , r
processed normal. r rejected processed normal, di min(di , d(r)).
Otherwise, di . use reservation distance guarantee
630

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

mutually blocking situations never occur, prevent situations degenerating
deadlocks.

4. Single Intersection
single reservation-based intersection, problem intersection manager
solve allocating reservations among set drivers way specific objective
maximised. objective be, instance, minimising average delay caused
presence regulated intersection. case, simplest policy adopt allocating
reservation first agent requests it, occurs FCFS policy proposed
Dresner Stone original work. Another work line objective takes
inspiration adversarial queuing theory definition several alternative control
policies aim minimising average delay (Vasirani & Ossowski, 2009a)
However, policies ignore fact real world, depending context
personal situation, people value importance travel times delays quite
differently. Since processing incoming requests grant associated reservations
considered process assigning resources agents request them, one may
interested intersection manager aims allocate disputed resources
agents value most. line approaches mechanism design,
assume human driver willing pay desired set space-time slots,
value good. Therefore, rely combinatorial auction theory (Krishna,
2002) definition auction-based policy allocation resources.
4.1 Auction-Based Policy
formalise auction-based policy processing incoming reservation requests,
necessary specify auction design space. includes definition disputed
resources, rules regulate bidding clearing policy.
4.1.1 Auctioned Resources
first step design auction definition resources (or items)
allocated. nature items determines type auction employed
allocate them. scenario, auctioned good use space inside
intersection given time. model intersection discrete matrix space slots.
Let set intersection space slots, = {s1 , s2 , . . . , sm }. Let tnow current
time, = {tnow + , N} set future time-steps. set items
bidder bid set = . Due nature problem, bidder
interested bundles items set I. absence acceleration
intersection, reservation request (Figure 4) implicitly defines space slots
time driver needs order pass intersection6 . Thus, items must
necessarily allocated combinatorial auction.
6. computation easily done intersection manager, knows geometry intersection. vehicles calculate trajectory, would need know geometry every
intersection pass through.

631

fiVasirani & Ossowski

t4

t4

t3

t3

t2

t2

t4

t4

t3

t3

t2

t2

t1

t1

t1

t1

t0

t0

t0

t0

Figure 4: Bundle items defined reservation request.

4.1.2 Bidding Rules
bidding rules define form valid bid accepted auctioneer (Wurman,
Wellman, & Walsh, 2001). scenario, bid bundle items implicitly defined
reservation request. Given parameters arrival time, arrival speed, lane type
turn, auctioneer (i.e., intersection manager) able determine space slots
needed time. Thus, additional parameter driver must include
reservation request value bid, i.e., amount money willing pay
requested reservation.
bidder allowed withdraw bid submit new one. may happen,
instance, driver submitted bid b, estimating intersection
time t, realises that, due changing traffic conditions, likely
intersection time + t, thus making submitted bid b useless driver.
case driver guarantees safety regarding crossing intersection. Thus,
rational thing case, driver would want risk involved
car accident, resubmitting bid updated arrival time. However, new bid
must greater equal value previous one. constraint avoids
situation whereby bidder blocks one several slots itself, acquiring early
overpriced bids. Even though would oblige others try reserve alternative
slots, thus make desired slot less disputed, bidder cannot take advantage
this, cannot withdraw initial bid resubmit lower bids order obtain
reservation lower price.
632

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

new bids

winners


bid set

Send
CONFIRMATION

Solve
WDP



Collect
incoming
bids

losers

Collect
incoming
bids

Send
REJECTION

new bids

Figure 5: Auction policy

4.1.3 Auction Policy
auction policy (see Figure 5) starts auctioneer waiting bids certain amount time t. new bids collected, constitute bid set.
Then, auctioneer executes algorithm winner determination problem (WDP),
winner set built, containing bids whose reservation requests accepted. WDP algorithm execution, auctioneer still accepts incoming bids,
included bid set next round. auctioneer sends
CONFIRMATION message bidders submitted bids contained winner set,
REJECTION message sent bidders submitted remaining bids.
new round begins, auctioneer collects new incoming bids certain amount
time7 .
4.1.4 Winner Determination Algorithm
Since auction must performed real-time, bid collection winner
determination phase must time-bounded, is, must occur within specific time
window. implies optimal complete algorithms WDP (Leyton-Brown,
Shoham, & Tennenholtz, 2000; Sandholm, 2002) suited kind auction.
algorithm anytime properties needed (Hoos & Boutilier, 2000), longer
algorithm keeps executing, better solution finds.
7. safety reasons auctioneer cannot spend much time collecting bids, deallocate
previously granted reservations. Therefore possible low-valued bid, winner set round
k, impedes allocation disputed reservation high-valued bids, submitted round k + n.
case, second bidder slow resubmit new (possibly winning) bid. Although
theory bid-delay relation (Figure 7) could worsened unrelated sequence auctions,
practice effect negligible.

633

fiVasirani & Ossowski

Algorithm 1 Winner determination algorithm
B allBids
W
start currentT ime
currentT ime start < 1 sec

step = 1 |B|
step step + 1
random drawU nif ormDistribution(0, 1)
random < wp
b selectRandomlyF rom(B \ A)
else
highest selectHighestF rom(B \ A)
secondHighest selectSecondHighestF rom(B \ A)
highest.age secondHighest.age
b highest
else
random drawU nif ormDistribution(0, 1)
random < np
b secondHighest
else
b highest
end
end
end !
AA
{b} \ N (b)
A.value > W.value
WA
end
end
end
Algorithm 1 sketches winner determination problem solved. algorithm
starts initialising set B containing bids received far. winner set W
initialised empty set. initialisation concluded, algorithm
executes main loop 1 second. Within main loop, stochastic search performed
number steps equal number bids B. Set contains candidate bids
winner set. Then, probability wp (walk probability8 ), random bid selected
set bids actually candidate winner set (B \ A), while,
probability 1 wp, highest second highest bids evaluated. highest bid
selected age (i.e., number steps since bid last selected added
candidate solution) greater equal age second highest bid. Otherwise,
8. probability adding random, previously allocated bid candidate winner set.

634

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

Figure 6: Simulator single intersection
probability np (novelty probability9 ) second highest, probability 1 np
highest bid selected. Finally bid b added candidate solution
neighbours N (b), is, set bids bundles share b least one item,
removed A. Finally, value (i.e., sum bids A) greater
value best-so-far winner set, W, best solution found far updated.
4.2 Simulation Environment
simulator use evaluation auction-based policy custom, microscopic,
time-and-space-discrete simulator, simple rules acceleration deceleration.
simulated area modelled grid, subdivided lanes (see Figure 6). lane
3m wide, subdivided 12 squared tiles 0.25m each. vehicle modelled
rectangle 816 tiles, equivalently, rectangle 2m4m, preferred speed
interval [30, 50]km/h. simulation environment generates origin-destination
pair randomly. vehicle spawned inside simulation, inserted
beginning one 4 incoming links, randomly selected, destination randomly
assigned it. destination implies type turn (left, right straight)
vehicle perform intersection well lane use travel (the leftmost lane case left turn, right-most lane case right turn, lane going
straight). preferred speed assigned using normal distribution mean 40km/h
variance 5km/h, limited interval [30, 50].
9. probability adding candidate winner set second highest bid rather greedy
bid, i.e., highest value.

635

fiVasirani & Ossowski

Since link used approach intersection relatively short, assume
vehicle travel pre-assigned lane, without changing it. Therefore, need
car-following model simulate vehicle dynamics, lane-changing model
needed. car-following model use Intelligent Driver Model (Treiber, Hennecke,
& Helbing, 2000). model, decision driver accelerate brake depends
speed, speed vehicle immediately ahead it. Specifically,
acceleration dv/dt given vehicle depends speed v, distance
front vehicle, speed difference v (positive approaching) :
"
# $ # $2 %
dv
v

= 1

dt
vp


(1)




= s0 +

#

v v
vT +

2 ag

$

(2)

acceleration, g deceleration10 , v actual speed, vp preferred
speed, s0 minimum gap, time headway.
acceleration divided acceleration towards preferred speed free
road, braking decelerations induced front vehicle. acceleration free
road decreases initial acceleration 0 approaching preferred speed vp .
braking term based comparison preferred distance ,
current gap respect front vehicle. current gap approximately
equal , braking deceleration essentially compensates free acceleration
part, resulting acceleration nearly zero. means corresponds
gap following vehicles steady traffic conditions. addition, increases
dynamically approaching slower vehicles decreases front vehicle faster.
consequence, imposed deceleration increases decreasing distance front
vehicle, increasing speed, increasing speed difference front vehicle.
aforementioned parameters set vp = 50km/h, = 1.5s, s0 = 2m, = 0.3m/s2 ,
b = 3m/s2 . speed vehicle updated every second, position, since space
discrete, updated tile closest new position continuous space.
4.3 Experimental Results
create different traffic demands varying expected number vehicles () that,
every O-D pair, spawned interval 60 seconds, using Poisson distribution.
spawned vehicles total time 30 minutes. Table 1 shows number vehicles
generated different values .
main goal set experiments test whether policy based combinatorial auction (CA) enforces inverse relation money spent bidders
delay. delay measures increase travel time due presence
intersection. computed difference travel time intersection
10. g different parameters different values, since usually vehicle decelerates (i.e., brakes)
strongly accelerates.

636

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management


# vehicles

1
29

5
136

10
285

15
438

20
633

25
716

30
832

Table 1: Traffic demands single intersection
regulated intersection manager, travel time would arise vehicle
could travel unhindered intersection. bid driver willing submit
drawn normal distribution mean 100 cents variance 25 cents, since
willingness human drivers pay usually normally (or log-normally) distributed (Hensher & Sullivan, 2003). Thus, agents homogeneous sense amount
money offering differs one another. population, track
delay subset drivers, endowed 10, 50, 100, 150, 200, 1000, 1500,
2000 10000 cents. endowment entirely allocated bid. evaluate
auction-based policy respect average delay entire population drivers.
WDP algorithm, set walk probability wp = 0.15 novelty probability np = 0.5, values produced best results auctions similar type
size (Hoos & Boutilier, 2000). experiments, give intersection manager one
second execute WDP algorithm return solution. give time bidders submit bids, starting another auction, intersection manager waits
another second collect incoming bids11 . determine one second enough
winner determination algorithm produce acceptable results, performed following experimental analysis. According results reported Hoos Boutilier, given
auction 100 bids, winner determination algorithm able find optimal
solution probability 0.6, tends 1 algorithm allowed run
10 seconds. encouraging, order justify adequacy
stochastic algorithm particular problem, need show that, context
auction-based policy reservation-based intersection control, produces results
reasonably close optimum, despite relatively short time (1 second experiments) algorithm return solution. Given average number
submitted bids single auction 3 low traffic demand ( = 1) 80
high traffic demand ( = 30), performed several experiments compare solution
provided algorithm 1 second run-time solution provided algorithm 100 seconds. solution provided second execution algorithm
assumed best approximation optimal solution. result
winner determination algorithm able find solution whose value least 95%
optimal solution value probability 96.1% high traffic demand ( = 30)
99.2% low traffic demand ( = 1).
Figure 7 plots (in logarithmic scale) relation travel time bid value
different values . error bars denote 95% confidence intervals.
sensible decrease delay experienced drivers bid 100 150 cents,
represent 49.8% drivers whose bid greater mean bid. Still, delay
reduction tends settle drivers bid 1000 cents.
11. Nevertheless, intersection manager runs separate thread receives incoming bids
WDP algorithm execution.

637

fiVasirani & Ossowski

500

90

80

70

60

10

100

1000

Bid (cents)
(a) = 10

10000

900

450

Avg delay (sec)

Avg delay (sec)

Avg delay (sec)

100

400

350

300

250

800

700

600

500
10

100

1000

Bid (cents)
(b) = 20

10000

10

100

1000

10000

Bid (cents)
(c) = 30

Figure 7: Bid-delay relation various values normally distributed endowments

remark auction-based policy uses reservation distance preprocessing step, guarantees drivers bid cannot rejected indefinitely.
fact, vehicle allowed approach intersection slow reaches
intersection edge. point, request rejected another driver submitted
higher value bid, reservation distance updated stopped vehicles distance.
Therefore, following time step, driver allowed submit bid
preferred value. result is, course, driver suffer greater delays compared
drivers willing pay more12 .
auction-based allocation policy proven effective regarding main goal,
is, rewarding lower delays drivers value disputed reservations
most. However, worth analysing impact policy intersections
average delay. Figure 8a plots average delay different traffic demands ( [1, 30]).
Again, error bars denote 95% confidence intervals. traffic demand low, performance CA policy FCFS approximately same. However, traffic
demand increases, noticeable increase average delay intersection
manager applies CA. somewhat expected, CA policy aims grant
reservation driver values most, rather maximising number
granted requests. Thus, bid b, whose value greater sum n bids share
items b, likely selected winner set. so, 1 vehicle
allowed transit, n vehicles slow try again. fact
highlighted average rejected requests (Figure 8b). Since non-winning
bids rejected, number rejected requests CA policy four times
greater FCFS policy.
12. Although focus technical problems social political ones, one may wonder whether
fair rich drivers travel faster poor drivers using road-infrastructure public
good. Nevertheless, could argue money raised auction-based policy rich
drivers contribute much maintenance extension public road infrastructure
poor drivers.

638

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

FCFS
CA

600

Avg delay (sec)

Avg rejected requests (%)

700

500
400
300
200
100
0
5

10

15

20

25

30

FCFS
CA

20

15

10

5

5

10

15



20

25

30



(a)

(b)

Figure 8: Average delay (a) average rejected requests (b)
4.4 Discussion
principle optimising use available resources unique guiding
principle traffic controller. real world, depending context
personal situation, drivers value importance travel times delays quite differently.
Thus, makes sense elaborate control policies aware different valuations
reward drivers value disputed resources most. respect,
evaluated control policy reservation-based intersections relies auction
mechanism. policy, drivers submit high-value bids usually experience
significant reductions individual delays (about 30% less compared drivers
submit low-value bids).
However, since objective policy maximising number granted
reservations, pays social cost, form greater average travel times. fact
might limit applicability CA policy high load situations. case, additional
mechanisms reduce number vehicles approach single intersection needed.
worth noting possible driver, even theoretically infinite
amount money, cannot experience zero delay approaching intersection.
auction carried realistic traffic scenario quite different
synthetic auction set-up benchmarking purposes (Hoos & Boutilier, 2000).
auctions arise traffic scenario affected high level dynamism,
uncertainty noise, intrinsic domain. example, high load situations,
reservation distance plays important role, since filters many potentially winning
bids coming greater distance13 . Figure 9 plots reservation distance decreases
time different traffic demands. high load situations, reservation distance
tends small, therefore wealthy driver must reach reservation distance order
participate auction acquire reservation, thus increasing travel time.
estimation arrival time greatly affects performance auction. fact,
13. outlined Section 3.2, reservation distance maximum distance driver allowed
request reservation.

639

fiReservation distance (m)

Vasirani & Ossowski

350

300

250

200






150

0

=1
= 10
= 20
= 30
5

10

15

20

25

Time (min)

Figure 9: Reservation distance

high load situations, estimation much noisy uncertain, likely
driver must resubmit reservation request updated arrival time.
way, possible agent wins auction time then, due new estimation
arrival time, must resubmit bid time + t. bidders participate
auction time + obviously different participated time t,
guarantee agent might win auction again.
Furthermore, real-world scenario urban traffic limits auction design space
applicable solution methods winner determination payments calculation.
fact, gave priority winner determination problem, adapting local search algorithm needs, payments calculation adopt sophisticated
method, i.e., winner pays price exactly bid submitted. This,
first-price payment mechanism, could principle lead malicious behaviours,
drivers try acquire reservations submitting bids lower
real valuations have. single item auctions computationally easy set
incentive compatible payment mechanism, second-price (Vickrey) mechanism.
Unfortunately, extending mechanism combinatorial auctions (computationally) straightforward, since equivalent truth-revealing mechanism combinatorial
world, Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG) payment mechanism (Clarke, 1971; Groves, 1973;
Vickrey, 1961), NP-complete. Therefore, although driver agent could potentially acquire
reservation submitting bid &b lower real valuation b, practical
point view exclusively affects revenues auctioneer gain every
bidder truth-telling, primary concern. Another possible weakness
fact bidder could start bidding lower real valuation raising bid able acquire it, thus leading communication overhead
bidders auctioneer. Nevertheless, bidders within reservation distance able submit bid, thus number bids intersection manager may
receive simultaneously necessarily bounded.
640

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

5. Network Intersections
single intersection scenario analysed performance auction-based policy
allocation reservations. context, driver modelled simple agent
selects preferred value bid submitted auctioneer.
focus urban road network multiple intersections, interesting notice
decision space driver much broader. fact, drivers involved complex
mutually dependent decisions route choice departure time selection.
time, scenario opens new possibilities intersection managers affect behaviour
drivers. example, intersection manager may interested influencing
collective route choice performed drivers, using variable message signs, information
broadcast, individual route guidance systems, evenly distribute traffic
network. problem called traffic assignment.
Section 5.1 evaluate market-inspired methods (Gerding et al., 2010)
applied traffic assignment strategies networks reservation-based intersections.
idea that, market drivers acquire necessary reservations pass
intersections urban network, market, intersection managers
operate supply side, designed work traffic assignment
system. particular, model intersection managers apply competitive
pricing strategy compete among supply reservations
traded. Finally, Section 5.2 combine traffic assignment strategy auctionbased control policy integrated mechanism traffic management urban road
networks.
5.1 Competitive Traffic Assignment (CTA)
Traffic assignment strategies aim influencing collective route choice drivers order
use road network capacity efficiently. Therefore, see traffic assignment
problem distributed choice allocation problem, since set resources (i.e.,
links capacity) must allocated set agents (i.e., drivers). regard,
markets mediators distributed resource allocation problems applied
several socio-technical systems (Gerding et al., 2010).
Setting approach outlined work Vasirani Ossowski (2011),
follow metaphor model intersection manager provider resources,
case, reservations intersection manages. Thus, intersection manager
free establish price reservations provides. side market,
driver modelled buyer resources. Provided current prices
reservations, chooses route, according personal preferences travel
times monetary costs. intersection manager modelled compete
others supply reservations traded. Therefore, goal market
designers making intersection managers adapt prices towards price vector
accounts efficient allocation resources.
641

fiVasirani & Ossowski

5.1.1 CTA Pricing Strategy
Let L set incoming links generic intersection. incoming link l L,
intersection manager defines following variables:
Current price pt (l): price applied intersection manager reservations
sold drivers come incoming link l.
Total demand dt (l | pt (l)): represents total demand reservations
incoming link l intersection manager observes time t, given current
price pt (l). given number vehicles want cross intersection
coming link l time t.
Supply s(l): defines reservations supplied intersection manager
incoming link l. constant represents number vehicles cross
intersection coming link l intersection manager willing serve.
Excess demand z (l | pt (l)): difference total demand time
supply, z (l | pt (l)) = dt (l | pt (l)) s(l).
Given set intersection managers operating market, J ,
define price vector pt vector prices applied intersection manager
controlled links:
pt = [ pt1 (l1 ) pt1 (l2 ) . . . pt|J | (lh ) ]

(3)

p1 (l1 ) price applied intersection manager 1 controlled link l1 , p1 (l2 )
price applied intersection manager another link l2 intersection,
p|J | (lh ) price applied |J |th intersection manager last controlled link
lh .
particular, say price vector pt maps supply demand excess
demand z (l | pt (l)) 0 links network. price vector, corresponds
market equilibrium price, computed Walrasian auction (Codenotti,
Pemmaraju, & Varadarajan, 2004), buyer (i.e., driver) communicates
suppliers (i.e., intersection managers) route willing choose, given current
price vector pt . information, intersection manager computes demand
dt (l | pt (l)) well excess demand z (l | pt (l)) controlled links. Then,
intersection manager adjusts prices pt (l) incoming links, lowering
excess supply ( z (l | pt (l)) < 0 ) raising excess demand
( z (l | pt (l)) > 0 ). new price vector pt+1 communicated drivers
iteratively choose new desired route, basis new price vector pt+1 .
equilibrium price computed, trading transactions take place driver buys
required reservations intersections lay route.
Walrasian auction relies quite strict assumptions, make direct implementation traffic domain hard. instance, set buyers assumed fixed
auction, means traffic domain new drivers may join
auction terminates. fact transactions take place disequilibrium prices strict assumption traffic domain. unreasonable
642

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

Algorithm 2 Intersection manager price update
t0
l L
pt (l)
s(l) 0.5 opt $(l)
end
true
l L
dt (l) evaluateDemand
z (l) dt (l) s(l)
z (l)
pt (l) pt (l) + pt (l)
s(l)
end
tt+1
end
drivers wait reach equilibrium point choosing desired route starting
travel. Finally, driver probably willing transfer money intersection manager
spatially close it, is, already travelling along desired route.
Thus, implement pricing strategy aims reach equilibrium price -
Walrasian auction - works continuous basis, drivers leave
join market dynamically, transactions take place continuously. reach
general equilibrium, intersection manager applies price update strategy sketched
Algorithm 2. time t, intersection manager independently computes excess
demand z (l | pt (l)) updates price pt (l) using formula (Codenotti et al., 2004):
'
(
z (l | pt (l))
t+1


p (l) max , p (l) + p (l)
(4)
s(l)



minimum price intersection manager charges reservations
sells.
s(l) supply intersection manager, is, number vehicles
intersection manager considers excess demand starts raise
prices.
claim drivers travel road network links low demand shall
incur costs. reason, choose = 0. define supply s(l), rely
fundamental diagram traffic flow (Gerlough & Huber, 1975). Let opt density
maximises traffic flow link l (see Figure 10). choose s(l) = 0.5 opt $(l),
$(l) length link l. words, intersection manager considers
excess demand density reaches 50% optimal density. way
intersection manager aims avoid exceeding opt raising prices diverting drivers
different routes reaching opt .
643

fiVasirani & Ossowski

Trafc ow (veh/h)

opt

opt
Density (veh/km)

Figure 10: Fundamental diagram traffic flow
5.1.2 Driver Model
Unlike single intersection scenario, case need reasonable driver model
route choice. route choice problem modelled multi-attribute utility-functionmaximisation problem. Given traffic system regulated market mechanism,
driver must take consideration different aspects route determine utility
value. route modelled ordered list links, = [l1 . . . lN ]. generic link
lk characterised two attributes: estimated travel time E[T (lk )] price
reservations K(lk ). sake simplicity, estimation based travel time
free flow, consider real-time information traffic conditions (see Equation 5,
$(lk ) length link lk , vmax (lk ) maximum allowed speed link lk ).
price reservations link lk always 0, unless link lk one incoming link
intersection (lk = l), case price pt (l) (Equation 6).
E[T (lk )] =

K(l ) =
k

)

$(lk )
vmax (lk )

pt (l)
0

lk = l L
otherwise

(5)

(6)

summatory estimated travel time links gives estimated travel
time entire route :
E[T ()] =

N
*

E[T (lk )]

(7)

k=1

Similarly, summatory price reservations links gives price
entire route :
K() =

N
*
k=1

644

K(lk )

(8)

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

Let C = {1 , . . . , } choice set, is, set routes available driver.
set C built using k-shortest paths algorithm (Yen, 1971), k = 10. Let uT ()
normalised utility route estimated travel time attribute (Equation 9),
MT = max E[T (i )] mT = min E[T (i )].
C

C

uT () =

MT E[T ()]
MT mT

(9)

Let uK () normalised utility route reservations cost attribute (Equation 10), MK = max K(i ) mK = min K(i ).
C

C

uK () =

MK K()
MK mK

(10)

driver multi-attribute utility route defined as:
U () = wT uT () + wK uK ()

(11)

wT weight estimated travel time attribute wK weight
cost reservations attribute. Basically, wT = 1 driver utility considers
attribute related estimated travel time (i.e., prefers shortest route, matter
price reservations), wK = 1 driver utility considers attribute
related cost reservations (i.e., prefers cheapest route, matter travel
time), every combination weights wT wK driver considers
trade-off estimated travel time cost reservations. experiments
draw wT uniform distribution interval [0, 1], set wK = 1 wT .
utility routes form choice set C computed, driver
must choose one alternatives. work, model driver deterministic
utility maximiser always selects route highest utility value. Since
price incoming links intersection changing dynamically, term uK ()
Eq. 11 may change journey. reason, driver continuously evaluates
utility route following and, case different route becomes
attractive, may react change on-the-fly reach destination, selecting route
different original one.
5.1.3 Simulation Environment
experimental evaluation performed hybrid mesoscopic-microscopic simulator,
traffic flow roads modelled mesoscopic level (Schwerdtfeger, 1984),
traffic flow inside intersections modelled microscopic level (Nagel &
Schreckenberg, 1992).
mesoscopic model vehicle dynamics governed average traffic density
link traverses rather behaviour vehicles immediate neighbourhood
microscopic models. road network modelled graph, nodes represent
intersections edges represent lanes road. edge, called stretch,
subdivided sections (of typically 500m length) constant traffic condition
assumed. vehicle time driving link lk characterised position
645

fiVasirani & Ossowski

xti [0, $(lk )], speed vit . time step, new target speed vehicle
computed, using formula:
v&it+t = (1

xti
xti
k
)

y(l
)
+
y(lk+1 )
$(lk )
$(lk )

(12)

y(lk ) reference speed link lk y(lk+1 ) reference speed link lk+1 .
reference speeds calculated taking consideration mean speed link
vehicles desired speed. mean speed link calculated speed-density
function given links density (lk ) returns links mean speed (Schwerdtfeger,
1984).
equation takes consideration fact closer vehicle
next link lk+1 , higher effect link reference speed vehicle target
speed. new target speed v&it+t higher (lower) current speed vit , vehicle
accelerates (decelerates) vehicle-type specific maximum acceleration (deceleration).
new speed denoted vit+t . Finally, vehicle position updated using
formula:
1
(vit + vit+t )
(13)
2
xt+t
$(lk ), vehicle placed next link route, densities link lk

lk+1 updated accordingly, position reset xt+t
$(lk ).

mesoscopic model described offer necessary level detail
model reservation-based intersection. reason, vehicle enters intersection, dynamics switches microscopic, cellular-based, simulator (Nagel & Schreckenberg, 1992), similar simulation environment used Section 4.2. Still, cells
compose intersections area coarse grained (5 meters), simplicity
assume vehicles cross intersection constant speed, additional
tuning parameters, slowdown probability acceleration/deceleration factors,
necessary.
xt+t
= xti +


5.1.4 Experimental Results
Although work depend underlying road network, chose (simplified)
topology entire urban road network city Madrid empirical evaluation
(see Figure 11). network characterised several freeways connect city
centre surroundings ring road. large dark vertex Figure 11 -
connects three links - modelled reservation-based intersection. aim
recreate typical high load situation (i.e., central, worst part morning peak),
11,000 vehicles departing within time window 50 minutes (see Table 2).
vehicles travel 7 destinations outside city (marked O1 O7
Figure 11) form traffic evaluation.
market-inspired traffic assignment strategy compared network FCFS
reservation-based intersections. latter, drivers route choice takes consideration expected travel time free flow, since notion price.
focus two different types metrics, one related vehicles one related
network. network-related metric density variation time 7 critical
646

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

Figure 11: Urban road network

Origin
O1
O2
O3
O4
O5
O6
O7

O1

O2

Destination
O3
O4
O5

O6

O7

223
300
208
199
290
224

323
364
233
228
316
231

355
221
229
261
398
214

349
214
368
199
238
253

271
229
362
204
209
337
-

336
248
343
216
386
235

311
191
358
218
374
219

Table 2: OD Matrix (# vehicles)
intersections (marked c1 . . . c7 Figure 11), connect freeways going toward
city centre ring road. vehicle-related metric average travel time,
grouped origin-destination (O-D) pair. given O-D pair, compute average
travel time vehicles go D. measurement averaged 30
runs. Furthermore, O-D pair compute improvement % CTA FCFS
based average travel times. Table 3 shows average travel time drivers,
according origin-destination pairs, reservations allocated
647

fiVasirani & Ossowski

competitive traffic assignment (CTA) granted usual FCFS
policy. Using CTA observe net reduction average travel time 30 42 origindestination pairs. reduction generally noteworthy busiest14 routes,
O6 -O2 , O6 -O3 O7 -O3 . Along less demanded O-D pairs, FCFS
best performing policy. happens preferred route
traffic density already low enough assure free flow, exist alternative routes
even lower demand, CTA keeps diverting traffic along potentially longer
thus slower routes.
evaluate effects trading activity drivers intersection managers
worth observing density variation time critical intersections c1 c7 ,
plotted Figure 12. general, density tends lower CTA compared
system regulated FCFS intersection managers. least demanded intersections c1 ,
c2 c7 , is, intersections whose density density maximises
traffic flow (see Figure 10), substantial difference CTA FCFS.
critical intersections less demanded due topology network. fact, fewer
origins located northern part (O1 , O2 O7 ).
critical intersections c3 , c4 c6 , vehicle density CTA always
density results use FCFS, especially case intersections c4
c6 CTA density exceeds optimal one small extent
limited period time.
intersection c5 , density higher peak around 9:30, density starts
exceed optimal density later begins fall optimal density earlier.
calculated integral density curves, measured interval curve
optimal density (Eq. 14)
+ t2
+ t2
CTA (t)dt
FCFS (t)dt
(14)
t1

t1

CTA FCFS density functions, t1 = min( | CTA (t) > opt , | FCFS (t) >
opt ) t2 = max( | CTA (t) < opt , | FCFS (t) > opt ). metric lower
reservations allocated competitive market (70.24 veh h/km versus
105.07 veh h/km).
result application market-inspired traffic assignment strategy
balanced urban network, since price fluctuations force demand change towards
less expensive intersections. fluctuations contribute creating system dynamic
equilibrium, unused intersections became cheaper congested ones became
expensive. effect average travel time decreases, although guarantees
drivers pay rewarded lower travel times.

14. empirically noticed experiments southern part network tends
congested simulation. due fact 4 7 origins/destinations (O3 , O4 , O5 ,
O6 ) located southern part.

648

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

Origin
CTA
O1 FCFS
%
CTA
O2 FCFS
%
CTA
O3 FCFS
%
CTA
O4 FCFS
%
CTA
O5 FCFS
%
CTA
O6 FCFS
%
CTA
O7 FCFS
%

Destination
O4
O5

O1

O2

O3

-

12.09
0.27
11.98
0.31
-0.8%

19.58
0.80
22.89
1.17
14.4%
14.17
0.72
16.50
1.06
14.1%

11.26
0.17
10.15
0.06
-11.0%
15.57
0.33
13.35
0.09
-16.7%
24.79
0.77
26.94
1.31
8.0%
26.80
0.84
32.17
1.83
16.7%
23.17
0.50
22.51
0.40
-2.9%
15.05
0.22
14.31
0.10
-5.2%

10.79
0.14
9.76
0.03
-10.6%
20.39
0.60
22.58
1.06
9.7%
22.83
0.71
30.61
1.70
25.4%
27.31
0.55
57.01
3.13
52.1%
23.52
0.33
23.26
0.40
-1.1%

11.62
0.41
13.92
0.82
16.5%
16.30
0.67
21.54
1.39
24.3%
25.30
0.89
41.05
2.59
38.4%
31.67
0.82
56.42
3.01
43.9%

26.70
1.04
35.13
1.80
24.0%
19.02
0.66
25.87
1.51
26.5%
9.18
0.08
12.21
0.62
24.8%
7.47
0.20
8.83
0.31
15.4%
16.40
0.73
24.68
1.62
33.6%
24.44
0.97
34.99
2.15
30.2%

30.75
0.83
43.57
1.89
29.4%
23.72
0.83
31.05
2.03
23.6%
13.99
0.37
17.64
0.92
20.7%
8.21
0.27
10.05
0.48
18.3%
12.12
0.46
19.02
1.50
36.3%
19.12
0.69
31.24
2.06
38.8%

O6

O7

21.17
0.20
21.35
0.40
0.8%
24.00
0.40
38.09
1.82
37.0%
18.54
0.32
23.69
6.34
21.7%
14.35
0.48
15.74
0.73
8.8%
11.11
0.24
10.77
0.26
-3.1%

14.13
0.12
13.83
0.09
-2.2%
20.88
0.23
19.51
0.15
-7.0%
24.95
0.42
31.73
1.36
21.4%
21.66
0.75
22.74
0.99
4.8%
19.47
0.63
17.66
0.52
-10.3%
16.58
0.89
13.73
0.32
-20.8%

11.69
0.11
12.00
0.20
2.5%

-

Table 3: Average travel time minutes ( 95%CI): CTA vs. FCFS

649

fiVasirani & Ossowski

FCFS
CTA
Optimum

14
12
10
8
6
4
2

FCFS
CTA
Optimum

20

Density (veh/km)

Density (veh/km)

16

0

15

10

5

0

08:00:00

09:00:00

10:00:00

11:00:00

08:00:00

FCFS
CTA
Optimum

40

10:00:00

30

20

10

50

0

11:00:00

FCFS
CTA
Optimum

40

30

20

10

0
08:00

09:00

10:00

11:00

08:00:00

Time
(c) Intersection c3

09:00:00

10:00:00

11:00:00

Time
(d) Intersection c4

40
30
20
10

FCFS
CTA
Optimum

40

Density (veh/km)

FCFS
CTA
Optimum

50

Density (veh/km)

09:00:00

Time
(b) Intersection c2

Density (veh/km)

Density (veh/km)

Time
(a) Intersection c1

0

30

20

10

0
08:00

09:00

10:00

11:00

08:00

Time
(e) Intersection c5

10:00

11:00

Time
(f) Intersection c6

16

Density (veh/km)

09:00

FCFS
CTA
Optimum

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
08:00

09:00

10:00

11:00

Time
(g) Intersection c7

Figure 12: Density variation time critical intersections evaluation
650

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

5.2 Integrated Mechanism Traffic Management (CA-CTA)
Section 4.1, introduced auction-based policy control single intersection.
experimental results showed policy quite effective allocating reservations drivers value most. Drivers bid high usually experience
great reduction delay (about 30%), compared drivers submit low-value
bids. However, policy showed couple drawbacks. First, fosters
attainment user optimum rather global one. therefore pays social price,
form greater average delay entire population drivers. Furthermore,
possible even wealthy drivers, high-load situations, could get reservation,
example due decreasing reservation distance.
hand, one results experimental evaluation Section 5.1
traffic assignment strategy make task traffic controllers easier, enforcing
better distribution traffic demand. Therefore, seems reasonable combine
auction-based policy competitive traffic assignment strategy integrated,
market-inspired, mechanism traffic management.
5.2.1 CA-CTA Mechanism
adapt competitive traffic assignment strategy (CTA) combine auctionbased policy (CA) integrated mechanism traffic management (CA-CTA). Since
intersection manager supplier reservations allocated
combinatorial auction, may control reserve price auctioned reservations, i.e.,
minimum price intersection manager willing sell. model
intersection managers way compete provision reservations
drivers, raising reserve price case increasing demand lowering case
decreasing demand. reservations allocated CA policy defined
Section 4.1. However, bids whose value reserve price accepted
bid set.
incoming link l generic intersection, intersection manager independently
computes excess demand z (l | ptr (l)) updates reserve price ptr (l) using
formula:
'
(
z (l | ptr (l))
t+1


pr (l) max r , pr (l) + pr (l)
(15)
s(l)

r minimum reserve price, s(l) number vehicles intersection
manager willing serve. Section 5.1, choose r = 0 s(l) = 0.5 opt $(l),
$(l) length link l, opt density maximises traffic flow
link l (see Figure 10).
5.2.2 Driver Model

empirically evaluate CA-CTA need define driver route choice model takes
consideration fact reservations allocated combinatorial
auction reserve price. assume driver holds private valuation
bids willing submit pass intersections chosen route, defined
variable b. Given monetary constraint, driver selects preferred route
651

fiVasirani & Ossowski

, taking consideration estimated travel time associated route. route
modelled ordered list links, = [l1 . . . lN ], characterised
two attributes, namely estimated travel time reserve price.
travel time estimation based, before, travel time free flow (Equation 5). reserve price link defined as:
)
pr (l)
lk = l L
(16)
K(lk ) =
0
otherwise
price link lk always 0, unless link lk one incoming link intersection
(lk = l), case price equal reserve price ptr (l) established
intersection manager. summatory travel time links gives
estimated travel time free flow entire route :
E[T ()] =

N
*

E[T (lk )]

(17)

k=1

Given b, driver builds choice-set C set routes whose intersections
reserve price lower desired bid b:
,
C = 1 , . . . , | K(lk ) b lk

choice-set built, driver selects shortest route = argmin E[T (i )].
C

5.2.3 Experimental Results
recreate typical high load situation, using network topology OD
matrix Figure 11 Table 2. interested two different types properties.
one side must evaluate whether integrated management mechanism (traffic
control+traffic assignment) guarantees lower delays drivers submit higher bids
(user optimum). purpose, calculate average (percentage) increase
travel times D, calculated according Equation 18, (i ) observed travel
time vehicle origin destination along route , mT travel time
origin destination along shortest route vehicle could
cross intersection unhindered15 . simplicity, refer percentage increase
travel time normalised delay.
D=

(i ) mT
mT

(18)

hand, would set system fair entire population
drivers, guaranteeing lower average delays (global optimum). Thus, compare
integrated mechanism network intersections governed intersection managers
apply FCFS control policy. assume case drivers choose
shortest route origin destination, since incentives
15. ratio enables us aggregate results drivers even though different origins and/or
destinations.

652

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

140%

Moving avg (min)

Normalised delay

25
114.30%

110%

80%

67.12%

73.31%

50%

58.10%

20%

0-50

50-100

100-150

150-200

FCFS
CA-CTA
CTA

20

15

10

5

0%

Bid (cents)

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Percentage completed trips

(a)

(b)

Figure 13: Relation normalised delay bid (a) moving average travel
time (b)
diverge route. aim evaluate global performance (in terms average
travel time) integrated mechanism compared straightforward application
FCFS policy network intersections, detect potential social cost similar
reported Section 4.3. metrics use assess performance
average delay every O-D pair, moving average travel time. latter
intended measure average travel time evolves simulation.
metric initialised 0 calculated follows: driver concludes trip,
travel time (i ) computed moving average travel time updated according
Equation 19, n number drivers completed trips far.
(i )
(19)
n+1
following tables figures refer two configurations abbreviations
CA-CTA (which stands combinatorial auction-competitive traffic assignment)
FCFS.
Figure 13a plots relation bid value normalised delay population
drivers16 . still possible appreciate inverse relation two quantities: drivers submit bids 150 200 cents reduce delay
50% compared bid less 50 cents. network level, granting
reservations combinatorial auction (the CA component CA-CTA policy)
ensures drivers submit higher bids experience lower delays (user optimum).
assess social cost incurred CA-CTA global level, measure moving
average travel time, is, average travel time entire population
drivers, computed O-D pairs, evolves simulation. compare CACTA FCFS and, completeness, CTA17 . results, 95% confidence
=T +

16. error bars denote 95% confidence intervals.
17. order evaluate CA-CTA CTA experimental conditions ran new set
experiments using CTA combination driver model detailed Section 5.2.2.

653

fiVasirani & Ossowski

Origin
CA-CTA
O1 FCFS
%
CA-CTA
O2 FCFS
%
CA-CTA
O3 FCFS
%
CA-CTA
O4 FCFS
%
CA-CTA
O5 FCFS
%
CA-CTA
O6 FCFS
%
CA-CTA
O7 FCFS
%

Destination
O4
O5

O1

O2

O3

-

12.22
0.26
11.98
0.31
-2.0%
-

13.65
0.31
22.89
1.17
40.3%
10.51
0.14
16.50
1.06
36.4%
-

12.16
0.21
10.15
0.06
-19.8%
15.05
0.69
13.35
0.09
-12.7%
20.79
1.23
26.94
1.31
22.8%
24.59
1.10
32.17
1.83
23.6%
25.08
1.53
22.51
0.40
-11.4%
15.73
0.32
14.31
0.10
-9.9%

12.51
0.62
9.76
0.03
-28.2%
18.45
0.93
22.58
1.06
18.3%
20.82
1.26
30.61
1.70
32.0%
26.72
0.40
57.01
3.13
53.1%
24.18
0.52
23.26
0.40
-3.9%

10.52
0.41
13.92
0.82
24.4%
12.62
0.63
21.54
1.39
41.4%
18.12
1.26
41.05
2.59
55.8%
22.12
2.28
56.42
3.01
60.8%

25.12
3.40
35.13
1.80
28.5%
19.58
1.38
25.87
1.51
24.3%
9.01
0.22
12.21
0.62
26.2%
7.91
0.48
8.83
0.31
10.4%
15.78
1.35
24.68
1.62
36.1%
26.86
2.59
34.99
2.15
23.2%

27.13
2.03
43.57
1.89
37.7%
24.17
1.74
31.05
2.03
22.1%
13.27
0.46
17.64
0.92
24.8%
7.32
0.15
10.05
0.48
27.2%
10.85
0.28
19.02
1.50
42.9%
16.81
0.99
31.24
2.06
46.2%

O6

O7

23.13
0.34
21.35
0.40
-8.3%
26.54
0.67
38.09
1.82
30.3%
18.72
0.68
23.69
6.34
21%
13.02
1.02
15.74
0.73
17.3%
10.01
0.28
10.77
0.26
7.0%
-

13.75
0.11
13.83
0.09
0.5%
22.21
0.37
19.51
0.15
-13.8%
26.76
1.02
31.73
1.36
15.7%
23.12
1.53
22.74
0.99
-1.7%
21.88
1.41
17.66
0.52
-23.9%
14.55
0.69
13.73
0.32
-6.0%
-

11.43
0.29
12.00
0.20
4.7%

-

Table 4: Average travel time minutes ( 95%CI): CA-CTA vs. FCFS
interval error bars, plotted Figure 13b. beginning, average travel time
similar scenarios, number drivers populate network
(i.e., load) increases, grows significantly faster FCFS CA-CTA
policy. terms average travel times CTA best performing policy. CA-CTA
slightly inferior performance, enforce inverse relationship bid value
delay (see Figure 13a). fact CA-CTA CTA outperforms FCFS
indication that, general, traffic assignment strategy (the CTA component
policies) improves travel time. fact, FCFS drivers always select shortest
654

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

route, cases best route choice. Furthermore, granting reservations
auction (the CA component CA-CTA policy) ensures bid value
delay reduction correlated.
Table 4 shows average travel time drivers, according O-D pairs,
intersection managers use CA-CTA mechanism, compared FCFS policy.
CA-CTA, net reduction average travel time 70%
O-D pairs compared FCFS. Furthermore, 30 intersections CA-CTA
outperforms FCFS, relative improvement (%) usually substantial
relative losses remaining 12 intersections. travel time reduction particularly
noteworthy busy routes O6 -O2 , O6 -O3 O7 -O3 gains exceed 50%.
O-D pairs CA-CTA performs worst (especially O5 -O7 O3 -O2 , losses
20%) assignment strategy able sufficiently reduce demand
intersection, thus considerably increasing travel time due social cost
combinatorial auction.

6. Conclusions
article studied distributed mechanism control management
future urban road network, intelligent autonomous vehicles, controlled drivers,
interact infrastructure order travel links network. last
section summarise discuss main contributions, propose future lines
work.
first objective extension reservation-based intersection control system (Dresner & Stone, 2008). focused modelling policy relied theory
combinatorial auctions (Krishna, 2002) allocate reservations drivers. empirical experimentation, discovered combinatorial auction-based policy guarantees
reduced delay drivers value time most, i.e., submit higher
bids. However, new policy showed paid social cost, term greater average
delays, especially traffic demand high.
second objective work go beyond single intersection setting,
extending reservation-based model network intersections. Building findings
reported Vasirani Ossowski (2011), realised traffic assignment strategy
could make task traffic control policy easier, better distributing traffic flow
network. studied market-inspired traffic assignment strategy tackled
problem adaptation perspective. model, intersection managers behaved
selfishly, competing others supply reservations intersections.
experimental evaluation showed way available resources efficiently
allocated drivers, generating balanced network.
Finally, combined competitive strategy traffic assignment auctionbased policy traffic control, order develop adaptive, market-inspired, mechanism
traffic management. demand-response pricing policy acted distribution
vehicles network, adapting reserve price (i.e., minimum price
intersection manager willing sell) generating system dynamic equilibrium,
unused intersections became cheaper highly demanded ones became expensive. demand particularly disputed intersections lowered reserve price
655

fiVasirani & Ossowski

fluctuations, social cost auction-based control policy lowered (at intersection level). Therefore, homogeneous distribution vehicles network led
better use network resources, thus lower average travel times. way,
entire population drivers rewarded lower average travel times and,
time, traffic control policy enforced inverse relation bid value delay,
rewarding drivers valued reservations reduced delays.
future work, economic models implemented, continuous double
auctions. Furthermore, work assumed driver decision making model exclusively
took consideration route choice, modelled utility maximisation
problem. order capture inherent complexity urban traffic systems, important
extend enrich driver behavioural model. example, driver could
implemented two layer decision maker, reactive, rule-based layer provides
short-term decisions car-following lane-changing, cognitive, BDI-style,
layer charge making complex decisions route choice departure
time selection (Rossetti, Bampi, Liu, Vliet, & Cybis, 2000).
Finally, article interactions vehicles infrastructure take
place. Thus, collaboration possible vehicles. Nevertheless, vehicle-tovehicle communication receiving great attention scientific engineering community (Biswas, Tatchikou, & Dion, 2006). particular, vehicle-to-vehicle communication
could used enrich action space driver, e.g. option dynamically
joining abandoning coalitions vehicles, based idea platoons (Varaiya, 1993).

Acknowledgments
research partially supported Spanish Ministry Science Innovation
project (CONSOLIDER CSD2007-0022, INGENIO 2010) OVAMAH
(TIN2009-13839-C03-02, Plan E).

References
Adler, J. L., Satapathy, G., Manikonda, V., Bowles, B., & Blue, V. J. (2005). multiagent approach cooperative traffic management route guidance. Transportation
Research Part B - Methodological, 39, 297318.
Bazzan, A. L. C., & Klugl, F. (Eds.). (2008). Multi-agent Architectures Traffic
Transportation Engineering. IGI-Global.
Biswas, S., Tatchikou, R., & Dion, F. (2006). Vehicle-to-vehicle wireless communication protocols enhancing highway traffic safety. IEEE Communications Magazine, 44 (1),
7482.
Choy, M. C., Srinivasan, D., & Cheu, R. L. (2003). Cooperative, hybrid agent architecture
real-time traffic control. IEEE Transactions Systems, Man, Cybernetics Part A, 33 (5), 597607.
Clarke, E. H. (1971). Multipart pricing public goods. Public Choice, 11 (1), 1733.
656

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

Codenotti, B., Pemmaraju, S., & Varadarajan, K. (2004). computation market
equilibria. SIGACT News, 35 (4), 2337.
da Silva, B. C., Basso, E. W., Bazzan, A. L. C., & Engel, P. M. (2006). Dealing
non-stationary environments using context detection. Proceedings 23rd International Conference Machine Learning, pp. 217224. ACM.
Dias, M. B., Zlot, R. M., Kalra, N., & Stentz, A. (2006). Market-based multirobot coordination: survey analysis. Proceedings IEEE, 94 (7), 12571270.
Dresner, K., & Stone, P. (2008). multiagent approach autonomous intersection management. Journal Artificial Intelligence Research, 31, 591656.
Gerding, E., McBurney, P., & Yao, X. (2010). Market-based control computational
systems: Introduction special issue. Journal Autonomous Agents MultiAgent Systems, 21, 109114.
Gerlough, D. L., & Huber, M. J. (1975). Traffic-flow theory. Transportation Research
Board.
Gershenson, C. (2005). Self-organizing traffic lights. Complex Systems, 16, 2953.
Groves, T. (1973). Incentives teams. Econometrica, 41 (4), 617631.
Hensher, D. A., & Sullivan, C. (2003). Willingness pay road curviness road type.
Transportation Research Part - Transport Environment, 8, 139155.
Hernandez, J. Z., Ossowski, S., & Garca-Serrano, A. (2002). Multiagent architectures
intelligent traffic management systems. Transportation Research Part C - Emerging
Technologies, 10 (5), 473506.
Hoos, H. H., & Boutilier, C. (2000). Solving combinatorial auctions using stochastic local
search. Proceedings 17th National Conference Artificial Intelligence, pp.
2229. AAAI Press.
Hunt, P. B., Robertson, D. I., Bretherton, R. D., & Winton, R. I. (1981). Scoot-a traffic responsive method coordinating signals. Tech. rep., TRRL Lab. Report 1014,
Transport Road Research Laboratory, Berkshire.
Ioannou, P., & Chien, C. C. (1993). Autonomous intelligent cruise control. IEEE Transactions Vehicular Technology, 42 (4), 657672.
Junges, R., & Bazzan, A. L. C. (2008). Evaluating performance dcop algorithms
real world, dynamic problem. Proceedings 7th International Joint Conference Autonomous Agents Multi-Agent Systems, pp. 599606. International
Foundation Autonomous Agents Multiagent Systems.
Krishna, V. (2002). Auction Theory. Academic Press.
Krogh, B., & Thorpe, C. (1986). Integrated path planning dynamic steering control
autonomous vehicles. Proceedings IEEE International Conference
Robotics Automation, pp. 16641669.
Lammer, S., & Helbing, D. (2008). Self-control traffic lights vehicle flows urban
road networks. Journal Statistical Mechanics: Theory Experiment, 2008 (04).
657

fiVasirani & Ossowski

Leyton-Brown, K., Shoham, Y., & Tennenholtz, M. (2000). algorithm multi-unit
combinatorial auctions. Proceedings 17th National Conference Artificial
Intelligence, pp. 5661. AAAI Press.
Meneguzzer, C. (1997). Review models combining traffic assignment signal control.
Transportation Engineering, 123 (2), 148155.
Nagel, K., & Schreckenberg, M. (1992). cellular automaton model freeway traffic.
Journal de Physique I, 2 (12), 22212229.
Ossowski, S., & Garca-Serrano, A. (1999). Social structure computational co-ordination
mechanism societies autonomous problem-solving agents. Intelligent Agents
V: Agents Theories, Architectures, Languages, Vol. 1555 Lecture Notes Computer Science, pp. 133148. Springer.
Papageorgiou, M., Diakaki, C., Dinopoulou, V., Kotsialos, A., & Wang, Y. (2003). Review
road traffic control strategies. Proceedings IEEE, Vol. 91, pp. 20432067.
IEEE.
Robertson, D. I. (1969). Transyt: traffic network study tool. Tech. rep., Rep. LR 253,
Road Res. Lab., London.
Rossetti, R. J. F., Bampi, S., Liu, R., Vliet, D. V., & Cybis, H. B. B. (2000). agent-based
framework assessment drivers decision making. Proceedings 3rd
IEEE Conference Intelligent Transportation Systems, pp. 387392.
Roughgarden, T. (2003). price anarchy independent network topology.
Journal Computer System Sciences, 67 (2), 341364.
Sandholm, T. (2002). Algorithm optimal winner determination combinatorial auctions. Artificial Intelligence, 135 (1-2), 154.
Schepperle, H., & Bohm, K. (2007). Agent-based traffic control using auctions. Cooperative Information Agents XI, Vol. 4676 Lecture Notes Computer Science, pp.
119133. Springer.
Schwerdtfeger, T. (1984). Dynemo: model simulation traffic flow motorway
networks. Proceedings 9th International Symposium Transportation
Traffic Theory, pp. 6587. VNU Science Press.
Small, K., & Verhoef, E. (2007). Economics Urban Transportation. Routledge.
Steingrover, M., Schouten, R., Peelen, S., Nijhuis, E., & Bakker, B. (2005). Reinforcement
learning traffic light controllers adapting traffic congestion. Proceedings
17th Belgium-Netherlands Conference Artificial Intelligence, pp. 216223.
Treiber, M., Hennecke, A., & Helbing, D. (2000). Congested traffic states empirical
observations microscopic simulations. Physical Review E, 62 (2), 18051824.
van Katwijk, R. T., Schutter, B. D., & Hellendoorn, J. (2009). Multi-agent control traffic
networks: Algorithm case study. Proceedings 12th International IEEE
Conference Intelligent Transportation Systems, pp. 316321.
Varaiya, P. (1993). Smart cars smart roads: Problems control. IEEE Transactions
Automatic Control, 38, 195207.
658

fiA Market-Inspired Approach Intersection Management

Vasirani, M., & Ossowski, S. (2009a). Evaluating policies reservation-based intersection
control. Proceedings 14th Portuguese Conference Artificial Intelligence,
pp. 3950.
Vasirani, M., & Ossowski, S. (2009b). market-inspired approach reservation-based urban road traffic management. Proceedings 8th International Joint Conference
Autonomous Agents Multiagent Systems, pp. 617624.
Vasirani, M., & Ossowski, S. (2011). computational market distributed control
urban road traffic systems. IEEE Transactions Intelligent Transportation Systems,
12, 313321.
Vickrey, W. (1961). Counterspeculation, auctions, competitive sealed tenders. Journal
Finance, 16, 837.
Wiering, M. (2000). Multi-agent reinforcement learning traffic light control. Proceedings 17th European Conference Machine Learning, pp. 11511158.
Wurman, P. R., Wellman, M. P., & Walsh, W. E. (2001). parametrization auction
design space. Games Economic Behavior, 35 (1-2), 304338.
Yen, J. Y. (1971). Finding k shortest loopless paths network. Management Science,
17 (11), 712716.
Zutt, J., van Gemund, A., de Weerdt, M., & Witteveen, C. (2010). Dealing uncertainty operational transport planning. Intelligent Infrastructures, pp. 349375.
Springer.

659


